Brooks_OrgBehavior_2011_E05N.pdf
aihi.G7YkOqDiHHWDF5A7ifd1_Y4-Brooks_OrgBehavior_2011_E05N.pdf.plain.html

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes journal homepage : www.elsevier .com/ locate/obhdpCan Nervous Nelly negotiate ?
How anxiety causes negotiators to make low first offers , exit early , and earn less profit Alison Wood Brooks a , ⇑ , Maurice E. Schweitzer b a 532.4 JMHH , 3730 Walnut Street , The Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104-6340 , United States b 544 JMHH , 3730 Walnut Street , The Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104-6340 , United States a r t i c l e i n f oArticle history : Received 31 August 2009 Accepted 27 January 2011 Available online 2 March 2011 Accepted by William Bottom Keywords : Anxiety Negotiation Bargaining Emotion Self-efficacy Continuous shrinking-pie game0749-5978/ $ - see front matter 2011 Elsevier Inc. A doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2011.01.008 ⇑ Corresponding author .
E-mail addresses : awood @ wharton.upenn.edu ( A.W ton.upenn.edu ( M.E .
Schweitzer ) .a b s t r a c t Negotiations trigger anxiety .
Across four studies , we demonstrate that anxiety is harmful to negotiator performance .
In our experiments , we induced either anxiety or neutral feelings and studied behavior in negotiation and continuous shrinking-pie tasks .
Compared to negotiators experiencing neutral feel- ings , negotiators who feel anxious expect lower outcomes , make lower first offers , respond more quickly to offers , exit bargaining situations earlier , and ultimately obtain worse outcomes .
The relationship between anxiety and negotiator behavior is moderated by negotiator self-efficacy ; high self-efficacy mit- igates the harmful effects of anxiety .
2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Introduction In almost every social and organizational setting , people face the challenge of negotiating with others to achieve their goals ( Barry & Oliver , 1996 ; Pruitt & Carnevale , 1993 ; Rapoport , Budescu , Erev , & Zwick , 1998 ) .
Although a substantial literature has devel- oped our understanding of negotiations ( see Bazerman , Curhan , Moore , and Valley ( 2000 ) for a review ) , relatively little work has explored how emotions influence negotiator behavior .
Important work that has studied emotions in negotiations has focused almost exclusively on anger and happiness ( e.g. , Allred , Mallozzi , Matsui , & Raia , 1997 ; Barry , 2008 ; Van Kleef , De Dreu , & Manstead , 2004 ) .
Surprisingly , prior research has not directly studied one of the most ubiquitous negotiator emotions : anxiety .
In this paper , we demonstrate that anxiety is commonly felt before negotiating and harmful to both negotiator behavior and negotiated outcomes.Moods and emotions Both moods and emotions can influence negotiations .
Moods are diffuse feelings characterized by either positive or negative valence ( Forgas , 1998 ) .
In contrast to moods , emotions are discrete , intense , ll rights reserved .
.
Brooks ) , schweitzer @ whar-and complex feelings that last for shorter durations ( Smith & Ells- worth , 1985 ) .
Unlike moods that are characterized along a single dimension , valence ( good to bad ) , emotions can be characterized along several dimensions ( Smith & Ellsworth , 1985 ) .
For example , anger , sadness , and guilt are all negatively-valenced emotions , but these emotions differ along the dimension of control ; anger is typically triggered by another person , sadness is typically trig- gered by a situation , and guilt is typically triggered by one ’ s own actions .
In this paper , we study incidental emotion .
Incidental emotions are triggered by a prior , unrelated situation ( Lerner , Small , & Loe- wenstein , 2004 ) .
For example , a colleague you meet for lunch may feel angry about a disagreement she had with her spouse ear- lier in the day .
In contrast to incidental emotions , directed emotions are triggered by aspects of the situation itself .
Though negotiations are likely to be influenced by both incidental and directed emo- tions , in our studies , we induce incidental anxiety .
Because they are normatively irrelevant ( i.e. , not related to the task at hand ) , incidental emotions offer a conservative approach for studying the influence of emotions on judgment and behavior ( Dunn & Schweitzer , 2005 ) .Affect in negotiations Early work studied the influence of mood on negotiations .
This work found that positive moods promote cooperative behavior , 44 A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54and that negative moods promote competitive behavior ( Barry & Oliver , 1996 ) .
In particular , positive moods increase concession making , stimulate creative problem solving , and increase prefer- ences for cooperation ( Baron , Fortin , Frei , Hauver , & Shack , 1990 ; Forgas , 1998 ) .
In contrast , negative moods decrease initial offers , decrease joint gains , promote the rejection of ultimatum offers , and increase the use of competitive strategies in negotiations ( Forgas , 1998 ; Pillutla & Murnighan , 1996 ) .
More recent research has studied the effects of specific emo- tions on negotiations .
This work has identified a number of important relationships between specific emotions and negotia- tor behavior ( e.g. , Steinel , Van Kleef , & Harinck , 2008 ; Van Dijk , Van Kleef , Steinel , & Van Beest , 2008 ; Van Kleef et al. , 2004 ) .
For example , negotiators concede more to someone who ex- presses anger than they do to someone who expresses happiness ( Van Kleef et al. , 2004 ) .
Feeling angry , however , can harm negotiators ’ ability to reach integrative outcomes ( Allred et al. , 1997 ) .
In addition to investigating anger , negotiation scholars have studied emotions including envy , disappointment , guilt , and regret ( e.g. , Van Kleef , De Dreu , & Manstead , 2006 ) .
For example , negoti- ators who feel envy are more likely to lie to their envied counter- part ( Moran & Schweitzer , 2008 ) .
In extant research , anger and happiness are the most commonly studied emotions in negotiations ( Allred et al. , 1997 ; Van Dijk et al. , 2008 ; Van Kleef et al. , 2004 ) .
Surprisingly , the literature on emotions in negotiations has neglected the study of anxiety .
This is an important omission because anxiety may be one of the most pervasive negotiator emotions ( Wheeler , 2004 ) .
Anxiety Although prior work has studied anxiety as a trait , a motive , and a drive ( Endler , 1983 ) , we consider anxiety as a state emotion that arises in response to a threat .
We integrate prior research on stress and trait anxiety ( Gray , 1991 ; Greenhalgh , 2002 ; Kantor , Endler , Heslegrave , & Kocovski , 2001 ; O ’ Connor , Arnold , & Maurizio , 2010 ; Raghunathan & Pham , 1999 ; Spielberger , 1966 ) to introduce the following definition of state anxiety : Anxiety is a state of distress and/or physiological arousal in reac- tion to stimuli including novel situations and the potential for undesirable outcomes.Consistent with prior work ( e.g. , Gray , 1991 ) , we define anxiety to include fear , frustration , stress , tension , worry , apprehension , and nervousness .
Within Russell ’ s ( 1980 ) affective circumplex model , anxiety is high in activation and unpleasantness , and within Smith and Ellsworth ’ s ( 1985 ) appraisal framework , anxiety is char- acterized by high uncertainty and a lack of control ( Raghunathan & Pham , 1999 ) .
We expect anxiety to be particularly important in negotiations .
Anxiety differs from other negatively-valenced emotions , such as anger , because it triggers a ‘ ‘ flight ’ ’ rather than a ‘ ‘ fight ’ ’ response ( Marks & Nesse , 1994 ) .
For example , whereas feelings of anger motivate individuals to escalate conflict , feelings of anxiety moti- vate individuals to escape or avoid conflict .
A few scholars have speculated that anxiety may be important for negotiations ( Adler , Rosen , & Silverstein , 1998 ; Small , Gelfand , Babcock , & Gettman , 2007 ; Wheeler , 2004 ) .
For example , Babcock , Gelfand , Small , and Stayn ( 2006 ) suggest that women may avoid negotiations because they feel anxious .
In their studies , women were more likely to avoid negotiations than men , and women were more likely than men to report feeling anxiety and discomfort .
Although anxiety may be a prevalent negotiator emotion , no prior work has directly investigated how anxiety influences negotiator behavior.Anxiety and flight in negotiations Anxiety is triggered by novel situations that have the potential for undesirable outcomes ( Gray , 1991 ) .
In many negotiations , such as the process of purchasing a home , the situation involves unfa- miliar people , unfamiliar issues , and the prospect of unfavorable outcomes ( Pruitt & Carnevale , 1993 ) .
For example , an unsuccessful negotiator may upset a counterpart , obtain an adverse outcome , or both .
Almost every negotiation is characterized by the potential for undesirable outcomes , and as a result , we expect negotiation set- tings to trigger anxiety .
Anxiety is an aversive state that motivates individuals to escape or flee from anxiety-producing situations ( Marks & Nesse , 1994 ) .
In our investigation , we study the influence of adding incidental anx- iety to negotiation and bargaining settings .
We expect individuals who feel high levels of anxiety to be eager to escape from anxiety- producing situations , such as negotiation and bargaining situations .
We consider two ways in which individuals might escape from negotiation and bargaining situations .
First , individuals can termi- nate the process and exit negotiations without reaching a deal .
Compared to individuals who experience neutral feelings , we ex- pect individuals who feel anxious to be more likely to exit negoti- ation and bargaining situations early .
Second , anxious individuals may seek to reach a quick agree- ment , even when persisting might yield a better economic out- come .
To increase the likelihood of reaching a quick agreement , individuals may lower their aspirations , lower their expectations , make low first offers , respond quickly to offers , and make quick concessions .
Compared to individuals who experience neutral feel- ings , we expect individuals who feel anxious to be more likely to lower their aspirations , lower their expectations , make low first of- fers , and respond more quickly to offers .
We expect anxiety to harm outcomes .
Behaviors triggered by anxiety , such as developing low aspirations and expectations ( Bro- phy , 1986 ) , making low first offers ( Galinsky , Seiden , Kim , & Med- vec , 2002 ; Liebert , Smith , Hill , & Keiffer , 1968 ; Neale & Bazerman , 1991 ; Yukl , 1974 ) , and exiting early ( Giebels , De Dreu , & Van de Vliert , 2000 ) have each been linked with poor negotiation out- comes .
As a result , compared to individuals who experience neu- tral feelings , we expect individuals who feel anxiety to attain worse negotiation and bargaining outcomes .
In our studies , we also consider self-efficacy , the belief that one can succeed , as a potential moderator of the relationship between anxiety and bargaining behavior .
Individuals with high self-effi- cacy persist in tasks longer than do individuals with moderate or low self-efficacy ( Lenta , Browna , & Larkina , 1984 ) .
In our investiga- tion , we expect individuals with high self-efficacy to persist in bar- gaining tasks longer than those with moderate self-efficacy , even when they feel anxious.Pilot survey Although a few scholars have suggested that anxiety is impor- tant for negotiations ( Adler et al. , 1998 ; Wheeler , 2004 ) , extant re- search has neither documented its importance nor directly studied the influence of anxiety on negotiations .
To motivate our investiga- tion , we conducted a pilot study with an adult population.Method Participants We recruited participants from a large Northeastern train sta- tion to complete a one-page survey in exchange for a candy bar .
A total of 185 participants ( 67 female , 84 male ) completed the 5 A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54 45survey .
Most respondents had more than three years of work expe- rience ( 88 % ) , and on average , participants were 38.6 years old ( SD = 16.11 ) .3.11 1.35 3.27 3.64 1.40 1 2 3 4 Happy Sad Anxious Excited Angry M ea n R at in g Fig .
2 .
Emotion ratings before negotiating over the price of a car ( pilot survey ) .Design and procedure The survey contained three sections .
In the first section , we asked participants to imagine that they and a stranger were about to negotiate , and to rank the three emotions that they would feel the most before the negotiation .
For the ranking task , we gave par- ticipants a list of the eight most common emotions from the PANAS basic emotion scale ( happy , sad , excited , guilty , anxious , proud , calm , and angry ) .
In the second section , we asked participants to imagine ‘ ‘ nego- tiating for a car ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ negotiating for a higher salary. ’ ’ For both of these scenarios , we asked participants to rate the extent to which they would feel each of five emotions using a 5-point scale ( happy , sad , anxious , excited , and angry ) .
In the third section , we asked participants to provide demo- graphic information ( e.g. , gender and age ) .Results and discussion In the first section of the survey , participants ranked the emo- tions they expected to feel before a generic negotiation .
A majority of participants ( 61.08 % , 113 out of 185 ) ranked anxiety as the emo- tion they would feel the most before a negotiation .
In the second section , when participants imagined negotiating over the acquisition of a car , excitement was rated most highly ( M = 3.64 , SD = 1.06 ) and anxiety was rated second-most highly ( M = 3.27 , SD = 1.16 ) .
In a repeated-measures analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) , we found significant differences between the partici- pants ’ five emotion ratings , F ( 4 , 158 ) = 149.53 , p < .0001 , g2 = .487 .
When participants imagined negotiating for a higher sal- ary , anxiety was rated most highly of the five emotions ( M = 3.71 , SD = 1.15 ) .
In a repeated-measures ANOVA , we found significant differences between the participants ’ five emotion ratings , F ( 4 , 161 ) = 145.40 , p < .0001 , g2 = .474 .
We depict participants ’ emotion ratings in Figs .
1 and 2 .
Both men and women expected to feel high levels of anxiety .
Though we found no significant gender differences , our results are directionally consistent with Babcock , Gelfand , Small , and Stayn ’ s ( 2006 ) conjecture ; women anticipated feeling slightly more anxiety than did men ( and men anticipated feeling slightly more excitement than did women ) .
Although prior negotiation work has studied anger and happi- ness , this work has neglected the study of anxiety .
Results from our pilot study reveal that anxiety is commonly anticipated before negotiating.2.82 1.45 3.71 3.45 1.57 1 2 3 4 5 Happy Sad Anxious Excited Angry M ea n R at in g Fig .
1 .
Emotion ratings before negotiating for a higher salary ( pilot survey ) .Study 1 In Study 1 , we explore the influence of anxiety on negotiation processes and outcomes .
In this study , we induced either anxious or neutral feelings and asked participants to complete a free-form negotiation task based on the cell-phone negotiation case devel- oped by Van Kleef et al .
( 2004 ) .
In this study , participants negoti- ated with each other via computer instant messaging .
Method Participants One hundred thirty-six students at a Northeastern university participated in the study for pay ( 81 female , 55 male ) .
Participants received a $ 10 show-up fee and had the opportunity to make up to an additional $ 15.20 based on their decisions and the decisions of others in the experiment .
On average , participants were 20.1 years old ( SD = 1.46 ) .
Design We randomly assigned participants to one of two between-sub- ject conditions : Anxiety vs .
Neutral .
We induced anxiety or neutral emotions by having participants listen to music via headphones during the negotiation .
Prior research has used music to manipu- late mood and emotions ( e.g. , Pham , 1998 ; see Brown and Volgsten ( 2006 ) for a review ) .
As a cover story , we informed participants that they would be asked to evaluate the music as part of a sepa- rate study .
In the Anxiety condition , we had participants listen to the theme from the movie Psycho .
In the neutral condition , we had par- ticipants listen to Handel ’ s Water Music : Air .
Both of these audio clips are orchestral compositions with no vocal parts .
The seg- ments we used were approximately 3 min in length , and we played these clips on a continuous loop .
Pilot study We conducted a pilot study to check the effectiveness of our audio clip inductions .
We recruited a non-overlapping sample of 162 participants who completed a series of studies in exchange for $ 10 .
Participants listened to either the anxiety or the neutral clip and rated their emotions while they listened .
To measure anx- iety , we averaged responses for anxious , apprehensive , worried , and nervous ( a = .86 ) .
To measure neutral feelings , we averaged re- sponses for neutral , indifferent , unemotional , and calm ( a = .91 ) .
As expected , mean ratings of anxiety were higher in the Anxiety condition than in the Neutral condition , t ( 160 ) = 10.00 , p < .001 , and mean neutral feelings were higher in the Neutral condition than they were in the Anxiety condition , t ( 160 ) = 6.41 , p < .001 .
Importantly , ratings of other emotions ( e.g. , sadness , anger ) did not differ across conditions .
We report these results in Table 1 .
Table 1 Mean emotion ratings during music manipulation check ( Study 1 ) .
Happy Sad Anxious Neutral Angry Anxious music Mean 1.94 1.18 2.17 1.85 1.27 SD ( 0.37 ) ( 0.46 ) ( 0.81 ) ( 1.07 ) ( 1.12 ) Neutral music Mean 2.02 1.24 1.16 3.47 1.07 SD ( 0.82 ) ( 0.71 ) ( 0.29 ) ( 1.16 ) ( 0.53 ) Note : Ratings were on a 5-point scale .
Table 2 Panel A : Buyer payoff chart ( Study 1 ) .
Panel B : Seller payoff chart ( Studies 1–4 ) .
Price of phones Warranty period Service contract Price Payoff Warranty Payoff Service Payoff Panel A $ 150 $ 0.00 1 Month $ 0.00 1 Month $ 0.00 $ 145 $ 1.00 2 Months $ 0.60 2 Months $ 0.30 $ 140 $ 2.00 3 Months $ 1.20 3 Months $ 0.60 $ 135 $ 3.00 4 Months $ 1.80 4 Months $ 0.90 $ 130 $ 4.00 5 Months $ 2.40 5 Months $ 1.20 $ 125 $ 5.00 6 Months $ 3.00 6 Months $ 1.50 $ 120 $ 6.00 7 Months $ 3.60 7 Months $ 1.80 $ 115 $ 7.00 8 Months $ 4.20 8 Months $ 2.10 $ 110 $ 8.00 9 Months $ 4.80 9 Months $ 2.40 Panel B $ 150 $ 8.00 1 Month $ 2.40 1 Month $ 4.80 $ 145 $ 7.00 2 Months $ 2.10 2 Months $ 4.20 $ 140 $ 6.00 3 Months $ 1.80 3 Months $ 3.60 $ 135 $ 5.00 4 Months $ 1.50 4 Months $ 3.00 $ 130 $ 4.00 5 months $ 1.20 5 Months $ 2.40 $ 125 $ 3.00 6 Months $ 0.90 6 Months $ 1.80 $ 120 $ 2.00 7 Months $ 0.60 7 Months $ 1.20 $ 115 $ 1.00 8 Months $ 0.30 8 Months $ 0.60 $ 110 $ 0.00 9 Months $ 0.00 9 Months $ 0.00 46 A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54Procedure For each session , we recruited even numbers of participants .
Our minimum group size was six and the maximum group size was 14 .
After participants arrived , we seated participants in sepa- rate cubicles in front of computers with headphones .
Participants read all of the instructions and completed the experimental tasks , including the negotiation , via computer .
First , we asked participants to complete an instant messaging practice round to ensure familiarity with the instant messaging platform .
Next , participants read background information and pre- pared for the negotiation task .
We then had participants put on headphones .
As a cover story , we informed participants that they would be asked to evaluate music as part of a separate study .
Par- ticipants listened to either the anxiety or the neutral music .
While the music played , participants reported their aspiration levels ( ‘ ‘ What do you hope to earn in the negotiation ? ’ ’ ) and expectations ( ‘ ‘ What do you expect to earn in the negotiation ? ’ ’ ) .
After respond- ing to these two questions , participants negotiated with their counterpart .
Participants negotiated via instant message , and we recorded the text of their negotiation .
After participants negotiated , we col- lected demographic information and paid participants based on the outcome of their negotiation .
Negotiation task Consistent with prior emotion and negotiation research , we used a three-issue cell-phone shipment negotiation ( De Dreu & Van Lange , 1995 ; Van Kleef et al. , 2004 ) .
We informed participants that they would be randomly assigned to the role of either buyer or seller .
Participants negotiated the price , warranty period , and service period of a cell-phone shipment with their counterpart .
Price was a distributive issue ( i.e. , win–lose ) , and warranty period and ser- vice period had integrative potential ( i.e. , participants could ex- pand the size of the total dyadic outcome by trading across these issues ) .
We provided participants with a payoff chart that showed their own payoffs associated with nine different levels of outcomes for each of the three issues .
We depict the Buyer and Seller payoff charts in Table 2 .
Sellers preferred a high price , short warranty per- iod , and short service period .
Buyers preferred a low price , long warranty period , and long service period .
The maximum possible individual outcome for both buyers and sellers was $ 15.20 .
The minimum possible individual outcome was $ 0 .
The maximum pos- sible joint outcome was $ 17.60 .
The minimum possible joint out- come was $ 12.80 .
We did not provide participants with their counterpart ’ s payoff table , but participants understood that it differed from their own .
We told participants that the negotiation could end in one of three ways : they reached a deal , one of the negotiators decided to exit by typing ‘ ‘ EXIT , ’ ’ or time ran out before they reached an agreement .
We gave participants 10 min to negotiate .
If they reached an agree- ment , we told them they would earn the negotiated amount .
If one of the counterparts exited before the end of the 10 min , we told them that both counterparts would earn $ 4 .
And if they did not reach an agreement before the end of 10 min , we told them that both negotiators would earn $ 0 .
Participants completed thenegotiation task over an instant messaging platform using an anonymous screenname ( e.g. , NegotiatorA , NegotiatorB ) .Results We report results for both the negotiation process and negoti- ated outcomes .
Across our analyses , we found no significant differ- ences for age or gender , and we report results collapsed across these variables.Aspirations and expectations We conducted an analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) on aspiration le- vel as a function of emotion condition ( Anxiety vs .
Neutral ) and role ( Buyer vs .
Seller ) .
We did not find a significant effect of emo- tion on aspiration level ( p = .60 ) .
Anxious participants ( M = $ 11.55 , SD = 3.60 ) aspired to earn as much as non-anxious participants did ( M = $ 11.93 , SD = 3.50 ) .
We also did not find an effect of negotiator role on aspiration level ( p = .57 ) .
We conducted an ANOVA on expectations as a function of emo- tion condition ( Anxiety vs .
Neutral ) and role ( Buyer vs .
Seller ) .
We found a significant effect of emotion on expectations .
Controlling for role , anxious participants expected to earn less ( M = $ 6.95 , SD = 2.57 ) than did non-anxious participants ( M = $ 8.31 , SD = 2.97 ) , F ( 1 , 139 ) = 8.46 , p = .004 .
We found no effect of negotiator role on expectations ( p = .79 ) .First offers Sixty-five of the 136 participants made complete first offers that specified values for all three issues .
About half ( 31 of 65 ) of the first offers were made by sellers .
We converted each three-issue initial offer into a total dollar va- lue for the participant who made the offer .
We conducted an ANO- VA on first offer value as a function of emotion condition ( Anxiety vs .
Neutral ) and role ( Buyer vs .
Seller ) .
We found a significant main effect of emotion condition on first offers .
Anxious participants made significantly lower first offers ( M = $ 8.36 , SD = 1.63 ) than did non-anxious participants ( M = $ 9.55 , SD = 2.29 ) , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 5.63 , p = .021 .
We found no effect of negotiation role on first offer ( p = .93 ) .
These results are depicted in Fig .
3 .
$ 11.55 $ 6.95 $ 8.36 $ 11.93 $ 8.31 $ 9.55 $ 0 $ 2 $ 4 $ 6 $ 8 $ 10 $ 12 $ 14 Aspirations Expectations First Offers M ea n V al ue ( U SD ) Anxiety Neutral Fig .
3 .
The effect of anxiety on aspirations , expectations , and first offers ( Study 1 ) .
A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54 47Response times We measured response time ( in seconds ) for each message sent during the negotiation .
For each participant , we computed aver- aged response time .
We conducted an ANOVA on each participant ’ s mean response time as a function of the negotiator ’ s emotion ( Anx- ious vs .
Neutral ) , the counterpart ’ s emotion ( Anxious vs .
Neutral ) , and the negotiator ’ s role ( Buyer vs .
Seller ) .
We found a significant main effect of the negotiator ’ s emotion on response time .
Anxious participants responded significantly more quickly ( M = 14.78 s , SD = 5.87 ) than did non-anxious participants ( M = 18.42 s , SD = 9.19 ) , F ( 1 , 135 ) = 7.32 , p = .008 .
We did not find a main effect of the counterpart ’ s emotion ( p = .70 ) , a main effect of role ( p = .28 ) , or interaction effects between the negotiator ’ s emotion , the counterpart ’ s emotion , or role on response time.Exit decisions Only four out of the 142 participants chose to exit before reach- ing an agreement .
Consistent with our predictions , all of the partic- ipants who chose to exit were in the anxiety condition , but the total number who exited is too small for us to draw inferences about exit decisions .
We investigate exit decisions directly in Stud- ies 3 and 4.Individual outcomes Four dyads failed to reach agreement because one negotiator chose to exit .
We excluded these eight participants from our anal- ysis of negotiation outcomes .
For each of the 134 participants who reached a deal , we computed the total profit they earned .
We conducted an ANOVA on individual profit as a function of the negotiator ’ s emotion , the counterpart ’ s emotion , and the nego- tiator ’ s role .
We found a significant main effect of the negotiator ’ s emotion on individual profit .
Anxious participants earned less profit ( M = $ 7.19 , SD = 2.16 ) than did non-anxious participants ( M = $ 8.04 , SD = 1.56 ) , F ( 1 , 130 ) = 8.53 , p = .004 .
We also found a significant main effect of the counterpart ’ s emotion on individual profit .
Participants who were paired with an anxious counterpartTable 3 Mean negotiated outcomes ( Study 1 ) .
Buyer emotion Seller emotion Buyer profit Anxious Anxious $ 7.52 ( $ 1.56 ) Neutral Anxious $ 8.18 ( $ 1.47 ) Anxious Neutral $ 6.60 ( $ 2.09 ) Neutral Neutral $ 7.94 ( $ 1.67 ) Note : Possible individual profit [ $ 0 , $ 15.20 ] .
Possible dyadic profit [ $ 12.80 , $ 17.60 ] .earned significantly more profit ( M = $ 7.99 , SD = 1.89 ) than did participants who were paired with a non-anxious counterpart ( M = $ 7.18 SD = 1.92 ) , F ( 1 , 129 ) = 6.03 , p = .015 .
We did not find a significant interaction effect of the negotiator ’ s emotion and the counterpart ’ s emotion ( p = .40 ) or a significant main effect of the negotiator ’ s role ( p = .52 ) on individual outcomes .
We report nego- tiated outcomes by condition and role as well as the number of dyads per experimental condition in Table 3 .
Expectations as mediator Following Baron and Kenny ’ s ( 1986 ) four-step mediation ap- proach , we analyzed expectations as a mediator of the relationship between anxiety and individual profit .
We regressed emotion con- dition on individual profit .
Anxiety was a significant predictor of individual profit ( b = .903 , SE = .314 p < .005 ) .
We then regressed emotion condition and expectations on individual profit .
By includ- ing expectations in the model , the influence of anxiety on individ- ual profit was reduced in significance ( from b = .903 , p = .0047 to b = .729 , p = .024 ) , and we increased the amount of explained var- iance from r2 = .059 to r2 = .093 .
This suggests that expectations partially mediate the relationship between anxiety and individual profit .
Dyadic outcomes We conducted an ANOVA on the total profit dyads earned as a function of the buyer ’ s emotion condition , the seller ’ s emotion con- dition , and an interaction between the two .
We did not find signif- icant effects for the buyer ’ s emotion condition ( p = .78 ) , the seller ’ s emotion condition ( p = .75 ) , or the interaction between the two ( p = .21 ) on dyadic profit .
Discussion Study 1 demonstrates that anxiety harms negotiation processes and outcomes .
In this study , anxious negotiators set lower expec- tations , made lower first offers , responded more quickly to offers , and attained worse individual outcomes .
Though anxiety caused negotiators to lower their expectations , anxiety did not cause negotiators to lower their aspirations .
This pattern of results sug- gests that anxiety temporarily lowers negotiators ’ self-efficacy , the belief that one can succeed in a negotiation ( i.e. , short-term expectations ) , but does not influence long-term goals ( i.e. , aspirations ) .Study 2 In Study 2 , we extend our investigation to explore the link be- tween anxiety and initial offers .
The first offer is a critical element of negotiations because it anchors the negotiation .
In our setting , negotiators had a complete payoff matrix that bounded the nego- tiation space .
As a result , in our setting , the first offer represents the first opportunity for negotiators to make concessions .
Previous work has linked first offers with subsequent patterns of conces- sions and , ultimately , negotiated outcomes ( Galinsky et al. , 2002 ; Liebert et al. , 1968 ; Neale & Bazerman , 1991 ; Yukl , 1974 ) .Seller profit Dyadic profit # of dyads $ 7.35 ( $ 1.88 ) $ 14.87 18 $ 6.99 ( $ 2.04 ) $ 15.17 14 $ 8.38 ( $ 2.23 ) $ 14.98 20 $ 7.81 ( $ 1.06 ) $ 15.75 15 $ 11.77 $ 12.73 $ 10 $ 11 $ 12 $ 13 $ 14 $ 15 Anxiety Neutral M ea n F ir st O ff er ( U SD ) Fig .
4 .
The effect of anxiety on first offers ( Study 2 ) .
48 A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54Unlike Study 1 , we use a very controlled computer-mediated negotiation procedure .
We adapted this approach from Van Kleef et al .
( 2004 ) .
Though this study lacks the interpersonal interaction of Study 1 , it affords us greater control over issues such as the amount of information exchanged and self-selection issues that might influence first offers .
We also extend our investigation in Study 2 by using a different emotion induction .
Method Participants We recruited 159 students at a Northeastern university to par- ticipate in a laboratory experiment for pay ( 72 female , 87 male ) .
Participants received a $ 10 show-up fee and had the opportunity to make up to an additional $ 5 based upon their decisions in the experiment .
On average , participants were 19.8 years old ( SD = 2.42 ) .
Design We randomly assigned participants to one of two between-sub- ject emotion-induction conditions ( Anxiety vs .
Neutral ) .
We in- duced emotions by showing participants one of two video clips .
Participants in the anxiety condition viewed a clip from the movie Vertical Limit ( Fredrickson & Branigan , 2005 ) .
In this video clip , a family climbs the face of a cliff and some of the climbers plummet to their death .
Participants in the neutral condition viewed a clip from Planet Earth .
This video shows fish swimming in an ocean , accompanied by calm , descriptive narration .
Pilot study We conducted a manipulation check of our video clip induction with a non-overlapping sample of 64 participants who completed a series of studies in exchange for $ 10 .
These participants watched one of the two video clips ( Anxiety vs .
Neutral ) and rated their emotions after watching the video .
To measure anxiety , we aver- aged responses for anxious , apprehensive , worried , and nervous ( a = .84 ) .
To measure neutral feelings , we averaged responses for neutral , indifferent , unemotional , and calm ( a = .95 ) .
After our manipulation , feelings of anxiety were significantly higher in the anxiety condition than in the neutral condition , t ( 62 ) = 7.48 , p < .001 , and neutral feelings were higher in the neu- tral condition than in the anxiety condition , t ( 62 ) = 5.80 , p < .001 .
Importantly , other negatively-valenced emotions ( e.g. , sadness , an- ger , and disgust ) did not significantly differ across conditions .
Procedure For each session , we recruited even-numbered groups of partic- ipants ( minimum group size was six participants ) to the labora- tory .
We seated participants in separate cubicles in front of computers with headphones .
We presented all of the instructions and experimental tasks on the computer screen .
We told partici- pants that they would complete a computer-mediated negotiation with another participant ( whose behavior was in fact simulated by the computer ) .
We tested their understanding of the negotiation with a comprehension check .
Participants who failed the compre- hension check twice were dismissed from the study ( n = 8 ) .
After completing the comprehension check , participants watched the video clip .
We explained this task to participants as a separate study about memory .
After watching the video , partici- pants made their first offer in the negotiation .
Negotiation task Consistent with Study 1 and previous work , we used a three-is- sue cell-phone shipment negotiation ( De Dreu & Van Lange , 1995 ; Van Kleef et al. , 2004 ) .
However , unlike Study 1 , in Study 2 the counterpart was simulated by a pre-programmed set of computerresponses .
We informed participants that they would be assigned to either the role of buyer or seller .
After a brief pause during which the computer purportedly assigned roles to each participant , we assigned every participant to the role of seller .
We did not provide participants with the buyer ’ s payoff table , but participants understood that it differed from their own .
We told participants that only those who reached an agreement would earn additional money .
We told participants that the seller would make the first offer , the buyer would see the offer and make a counteroffer , and the negotiation would continue until they reached an agreement or until time ran out .
We explained that there would be at least six rounds of offers and counteroffers , but that they would not know the exact length of the negotiation .
In fact , every negotiation ended after the sixth round of offers ( as in Van Kleef et al. , 2004 ) .
After the instructions and a comprehension check , sellers made their first offer .
First offers capture negotiator behavior immediately following the emotion induction .
We postulate ( and demonstrate in Study 3 ) that the effects of our movie-clip induction dissipate quickly .
In this study , participants knew the full range of possible offers .
Therefore , we conceptualize first offers as a form of concessionary behavior .
Results and discussion Supporting our prediction , participants in the anxiety condition made significantly lower first offers ( M = $ 11.77 , SD = 2.55 ) than did participants in the neutral condition ( M = $ 12.73 , SD = 2.20 ) , t ( 147 ) = 2.45 , p = .015 .
This result is depicted in Fig .
4 .
We did not find significant differences across conditions in subsequent rounds of the negotiation .
Participants in the anxiety condition made steeper initial con- cessions ( i.e. , lower first offers ) than did participants in the neutral condition .
This finding supports our prediction , and suggests that anxious negotiators are more eager than non-anxious negotiators to escape negotiations .
We test this hypothesis directly in Study 3 .
Study 3 In Study 3 , we shift our focus from negotiation to bargaining sit- uations .
Bargaining situations are abstracted versions of negotia- tions , and behavior in bargaining situations enables scholars to study behaviors that have important implications for both bargain- ing and negotiations .
In this study , we examine the influence of anxiety on deliberate exit decisions in a bargaining game .
Consis- tent with our thesis , we expect anxious individuals to exit bargain- ing situations earlier than individuals who are not anxious .
Fig .
5 .
Continuous shrinking-pie bargaining task payoff function ( Studies 3–4 ) .
Note : this is a screen-shot of the payoff animation displayed to participants .
19.2 24.79 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Anxiety Neutral M ea n E xi t T im e ( s ec on ds ) Fig .
6 .
The effect of anxiety on exit decisions ( Study 3 ) .
A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54 49We study exit decisions in a modified version of the shrinking- pie game .
A substantial literature has studied bargaining behavior with shrinking-pie games ( e.g. , Rubinstein , 1982 ; Weg , Rapoport , & Felsenthal , 1990 ) , including the shortest version of the shrinking- pie game , the ultimatum game ( e.g. , Bolton & Zwick , 1995 ; Solnick & Schweitzer , 1999 ) .
In this study , we introduce a new variation of the shrinking-pie game to study exit decisions in a bargaining context .
Method Participants One hundred seventy-nine students at a Northeastern univer- sity participated in the study for a $ 10 show-up fee and the oppor- tunity to make up to an additional $ 23 based upon their decisions and the decisions of others in the experiment ( 92 female , 87 male ) .
On average , participants were 20.1 years old ( SD = 1.89 ) .
Design/procedure In this study , there were two within-subjects conditions ( Anxi- ety vs .
Neutral ) .
Participants read instructions , completed a com- prehension check , watched the first video clip , completed the first bargaining task , watched a second video clip , and then com- pleted a second bargaining task with a new partner .
The order in which the video clips were presented was counterbalanced be- tween subjects .
Bargaining task We developed a continuous version of the shrinking-pie game ( Rubinstein , 1982 ; Weg et al. , 1990 ) .
The original version of the shrinking-pie game involves two players who make sequential moves to decide how to divide a ‘ ‘ pie ’ ’ or sum of money .
In the first round , the first player proposes a division of the pie .
The second player can either accept or reject this proposed split .
If the second player rejects the proposed division , the pie shrinks , and the sec- ond player proposes a division of the reduced pie .
The first player can then either accept or reject the new proposal .
If the first player rejects the proposed division , the pie shrinks again , and the first player proposes another division of the reduced pie .
This procedure continues until one of the parties accepts a proposed division or the game ends with an imposed payoff ( e.g. , $ 0 , $ 0 ) .
This bargain- ing game has been called the ‘ ‘ shrinking-pie ’ ’ game because the size of the sum of money shrinks at each stage of the game ( Rubin- stein , 1982 ) .
The shrinking-pie game is very similar to the ultimatum game , which has been extensively studied to investigate bargaining behavior .
In fact , the one-round version of the shrinking-pie game is equivalent to the ultimatum game .
In the ultimatum game , the first player proposes a division of the pie , the second player either accepts or rejects the proposed division , and the game ends .
Stud- ies involving the ultimatum game have examined a number of negotiation-relevant topics , including fairness , deception , emotion , and even physical attractiveness ( Blount & Larrick , 2000 ; Fehr & Schmidt , 1999 ; Moran & Schweitzer , 2008 ; Solnick & Schweitzer , 1999 ) .
Like the ultimatum game , the shrinking-pie game measures an important aspect of bargaining and negotiation behavior : the deci- sion to exit .
The shrinking-pie game is particularly well-suited for our investigation because it involves a relatively short interaction that follows an emotion induction .
In this study , we used a mo- vie-clip induction that may dissipate before the end of a lengthy or involved negotiation .
We develop a modified version of the shrinking-pie game .
In our version , two players make simultaneous decisions to stay or to exit the bargaining game as the pie shrinks continuously over time .
In our experiment , the pie starts at $ 30 and decreases by 50 centsevery second ( until the pie equals $ 0 after 60 s ) .
Participants can stop the clock by choosing to exit any time during the 60 s. The first player to exit stops the clock and determines the size of the pie .
The first player to exit earns 25 % of the pie and the second player to exit earns 75 % of the pie .
In this game , players choose exit decisions to balance two competing concerns ; early exit ensures a large pie size , but increases the likelihood of claiming a small share of the pie .
In this experiment , participants learned that they would be matched with another participant in the session to complete a computer-mediated bargaining task .
We presented each partici- pant with the payoff information depicted in Fig .
5 , an animation of how the pie decreases over time .
We informed participants that their counterpart would see the same figure .
We also told partici- pants that if both participants waited until the end to exit , they would both earn $ 0 .
We informed participants that they would make their decisions simultaneously and independently ; participants would not know when their counterpart decided to exit until after they had made their own decision .
We also informed participants that they would make two rounds of decisions with a different counterpart each time .
Finally , we informed participants that we would randomly select one of the rounds and pay them the amount they earned that round .
Results and discussion Supporting our prediction , participants in the Anxiety condition exited the bargaining situation earlier ( M = 19.20 s , SD = 15.17 ) 50 A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54than did participants in the Neutral condition ( M = 24.79 s , SD = 17.60 ) .
In a one-way repeated-measures analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) within subjects , we found that this relationship was sig- nificant , F ( 1 , 177 ) = 38.21 , p < .0001 .
We depict this effect in Fig .
6 .
We found no order effects for the sequence in which we presented the video clips ( anxiety clip first vs. neutral clip first ) .
Results from Study 3 demonstrate that anxiety causes individu- als to exit early .
We believe that the decision to exit in this bargain- ing context is indicative of exit tendencies more broadly .
Study 4 In Study 4 , we consider an important moderator of the influence of anxiety on exit behavior : negotiator self-efficacy .
Negotiator self-efficacy is the belief in one ’ s ability to perform well in a negotiation ( Bandura , 1993 ; Sullivan , O ’ Connor , & Burris , 2006 ) .
Prior research has found that people tend to believe that they are below average in performing difficult skill-based tasks , such as negotiating ( Moore & Caine , 2007 ) .
Other work , however , has found that negotiators with high self-efficacy may feel confident in their negotiating ability and insulate themselves from the pros- pect of negative outcomes .
We postulate that individuals with high negotiator self-efficacy are less affected by anxiety than are negotiators with average negotiator self-efficacy .
Specifically , we expect negotiators with high self-efficacy to persist in difficult negotiations , and we predict that anxiety influences negotiators with high self-efficacy less than it influences negotiators with moderate self-efficacy .
In Study 4 , we consider the role of negotiator self-efficacy in moderating the rela- tionship between anxiety and early exit .
Method Participants One hundred fifty-nine students at a Northeastern university participated in the study for a $ 10 show-up fee and the opportu- nity to earn up to an additional $ 23 .
On average , participants were 20.3 years old ( SD = 2.01 ) .
Design We randomly assigned participants to one of four conditions in a 2 ( Anxiety vs .
Neutral ) 2 ( High self-efficacy vs. Average self- efficacy ) design .
We manipulated emotion ( Anxiety vs .
Neutral ) as we did in Studies 2 and 3 with video clips .
We manipulated negotiator self-efficacy by providing false per- formance feedback ( High self-efficacy vs. Average self-efficacy ) on a ‘ ‘ Negotiation Aptitude Test. ’ ’ For this study , we developed the Negotiation Aptitude Test by creating ten questions to purportedly assess negotiation ability .
We include the full Negotiation Aptitude Test in Appendix A .
We introduced the aptitude test with the fol- lowing text : Negotiations often involve balance .
For example , some people are too aggressive and some are too passive .
Some people focus too much on relationships and some focus too much on their own interests .
Though there are often no perfect answers , the Negotia- tion Aptitude Test ( NAT ) has been validated on a large US based sample .
For example , NAT scores have been linked to a number of real-world outcomes such as starting salaries , home sale prices , and auto purchases .
Following the introduction , participants answered 10 questions , such as the following : Imagine that you want to purchase a house that has a list price of $ 500,000 , but comparable prices for homes range from $ 350,000 to $ 450,000 .
You can afford to pay $ 400,000 .
The housing market isrising ( house prices are increasing ) , and there are three other buy- ers interested in the same house .
Of the following options , which is best ? a .
Wait for another buyer to make an initial offer .
b .
Offer $ 400 K before the other buyers make offers .
c. Offer $ 350 K before the other buyers make offers .
d. Look for a different house that has fewer interested buyers .
After participants completed the Negotiation Aptitude Test , we provided them with false performance feedback .
In the high self- efficacy condition , we informed participants that they had scored in the 96th percentile .
In the Average self-efficacy condition , we in- formed participants that they had scored in the 47th percentile .
Pilot study To assess the effectiveness of the self-efficacy induction , we conducted a manipulation check with a non-overlapping sample of 107 participants who completed the Negotiation Aptitude Test as part of a series of studies they completed in exchange for a $ 10 show-up fee .
We randomly assigned participants to one of two conditions ( High self-efficacy vs. Average self-efficacy ) .
Participants completed the Negotiation Aptitude Test , received false performance feedback , and then completed a 10-item measure of negotiator self-efficacy ( Sullivan , O ’ Connor , & Burris , 2005 ) .
The 10 items included state- ments such as ‘ ‘ I am certain that I can persuade the other negotiator to make most of the concessions ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ I feel confident in my ability to negotiate effectively ’ ’ ( rated on a 5-point scale ) .
We compared negotiator self-efficacy across conditions .
After our manipulation , participants ’ mean level of negotiator self-effi- cacy was significantly higher in the High condition ( M = 3.60 , SD = .53 ) than in the Average condition ( M = 3.18 , SD = .55 ) , t ( 105 ) = 4.02 , p < .001 .
Procedure First , participants completed the Negotiation Aptitude Test and received false performance feedback .
Second , participants read the instructions for the continuous shrinking-pie bargaining task ( as in Study 3 ) and completed a comprehension check .
Next , participants watched one of two emotion-inducing video clips , and then made exit decisions in the continuous shrinking-pie bargaining task .
Results and discussion We found that self-efficacy moderated the influence of anxiety on exit decisions .
We conducted a 2 ( Anxiety vs .
Neutral ) 2 ( High self-efficacy vs. Average self-efficacy ) analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) on exit decisions .
We found two significant main effects and a sig- nificant interaction .
As before , participants in the Anxiety condi- tion exited earlier than did participants in the Neutral condition , F ( 1 , 155 ) = 4.01 , p = .047 .
In addition , participants in the Average self-efficacy condition exited earlier than did participants in the High self-efficacy condition , F ( 1 , 155 ) = 14.83 , p = .0002 .
Interest- ingly , we found a significant interaction between anxiety and self-efficacy , F ( 1 , 155 ) = 4.29 , p = .04 .
Participants in the Average self-efficacy condition exhibit the same pattern of results we found in Study 3 .
However , participant in the High self-efficacy condition were not influenced by anxiety .
We depict this pattern of results in Fig .
7 .
General discussion For many people , the prospect of negotiating induces anxiety .
In fact , anxiety may be the most pervasive negotiator emotion .
We demonstrate that anxiety significantly harms negotiator behavior .
14.2 28.53 24.05 28.36 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 M ea n E xi t T im e ( s ec on ds ) Negotiator Self-Efficacy Anxiety Neutral Average High Fig .
7 .
The effects of anxiety and negotiator self-efficacy on exit decisions ( Study 4 ) .
A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54 51Compared to negotiators in a neutral emotional state , anxious negotiators lower their expectations , make lower first offers , respond to counteroffers more quickly , and exit negotiations earlier—behaviors that are not explained by other negatively- valenced emotions .
In our studies , these behaviors caused anxious negotiators to attain worse outcomes .
We also found that negotia- tor self-efficacy moderates the effects of anxiety on exit behavior .
Individuals with high negotiator self-efficacy are less affected by the harmful effects of anxiety .
In our studies , we induced incidental anxiety .
This approach afforded us experimental control ; every participant experienced the same stimuli , and there were no normative reasons for inciden- tal anxiety to influence negotiation behavior .
As a result , our stud- ies offer a conservative test of the influence of anxiety on negotiations .
In addition to experiencing incidental anxiety , nego- tiators are likely to experience directed anxiety .
The prospect of a difficult negotiation , high stakes , or an abrasive counterpart can trigger anxiety .
Future work should investigate different triggers and the effects of directed anxiety on negotiator behavior .
Our findings establish an important link between anxiety and self-efficacy .
Future work remains , however , with respect to under- standing negotiator self-efficacy itself .
Prior research has measured negotiator self-efficacy and linked self-efficacy with tactics and outcomes ( Sullivan , O ’ Connor , & Burris , 2005 ) , but no prior work has induced negotiator self-efficacy .
In this paper , we introduce a tool for inducing negotiator self-efficacy ( see Appendix A ) , and we find that negotiator self-efficacy is both labile and consequen- tial .
In Study 4 , participants who received false performance feed- back indicating that they were effective negotiators were more tenacious and made later exit decisions than did negotiators who received false performance feedback indicating that they were average negotiators .
Prescriptively , our findings suggest that negotiators may im- prove their performance by curtailing their experience of anxiety and by boosting their perceptions of negotiation self-efficacy .
For example , negotiation courses as well as negotiation simulations and training more generally may reduce anxiety and improve negotiator performance by boosting negotiator self-efficacy and by making negotiation situations routine ( i.e. , less novel ) and hence less anxiety provoking .
Future work should study these rela- tionships and even consider the broader implication that self-affir- mation in general may boost generalized self-efficacy and improve negotiation performance .
Another possible prescription for curtailing the influence of anxiety is to heighten self-awareness of anxiety .
Prior work has found that making people aware of their emotional state enablespeople to correct for the influence of emotions on their judgment ( Schwarz , 1990 ) .
Perhaps acknowledging feelings of anxiety could serve as a coping mechanism .
Our findings demonstrate that anxiety promotes flight behavior in negotiation .
Future work should consider different types of flight .
For example , there may be qualitative differences between volitional exit ( i.e. , deciding to leave prematurely ) and an acceler- ated process ( i.e. , faster response times ) .
In negotiations , volitional exit may yield impasses , whereas an accelerated process may yield poor agreements .
In some cases , incentives may counteract the detrimental effects of anxiety on exit behavior .
Quite possibly , even anxious individuals may be persuaded to persist until they reach specific goals , and future work should explore the interplay between incentives and different types of exit .
For example , in Study 1 , the expected value of exit was much lower than the ex- pected value of reaching an agreement .
In this case , few negotia- tors exited with an impasse .
Instead , anxious negotiators accelerated their process by lowering expectations , responding more quickly to counteroffers , and making steeper concessions .
Quite possibly , a strategic negotiator could induce anxiety in a counterpart to extract concessions .
Even non-strategic negotiators may induce anxiety in a counterpart , either accidentally or via con- tagion .
Prior work has found that emotions are easily transmitted across individuals ( e.g. , Barsade , 2002 ; Hatfield , Cacioppo , & Rap- son , 1994 ) , and we conjecture that anxiety is highly contagious .
Fu- ture work should explore issues such as how people perceive anxiety in others and how anxiety spreads between team members and negotiators .
A number of individual differences may moderate the relation- ship between anxiety and negotiator behavior .
For example , risk attitude impacts negotiator behavior ( Bottom , 1998 ) , and differ- ences in risk attitudes may influence the amount of anxiety nego- tiators experience in uncertain environments .
Neuroticism may also matter .
Neuroticism is a personality trait associated with the tendency to arouse quickly , to inhibit slowly , and to appraise events as stressful ( Costa & McCrae , 1992 ) .
Individuals high in neu- roticism may be particularly susceptible to anxiety triggers and the influence of anxiety in negotiation .
We identify an important link between the anxiety individuals experience and negotiation behavior .
The association between anxiety and negotiations we measured in our pilot survey , how- ever , was expected anxiety .
Though prior work has found that peo- ple sometimes mispredict their affective experiences ( Robinson & Clore , 2002 ) , we postulate that the experience of anxiety is a fun- damental aspect of many negotiations that merits additional re- search .
For example , future work should study how different aspects of negotiations induce anxiety , how the magnitude of anx- iety may change behavior , how anxiety influences information ex- change , how anxiety influences negotiator satisfaction , how anxiety influences decisions to enter negotiations , and how anxiety influences patterns of concessions .
In addition to describing the importance of anxiety as an antic- ipatory emotion , our findings highlight the importance of excite- ment in negotiations .
Future work should focus on the influence of excitement in negotiations and explore the interplay between anxiety , excitement , and physiological arousal .
Some individuals may conceptualize a negotiation as an anxiety-inducing threat , while others may conceptualize the same situation as an exciting challenge .
Similarly , though we did not detect significant gender differences in our studies , it is possible that men and women may perceive the same opportunities to negotiate quite differently ( see Small et al. , 2007 ) .
Our findings also relate to the literature on alcohol in negotia- tions .
Many negotiators consume alcohol prior to or during negoti- ations ( Schweitzer & Kerr , 2000 ) .
Alcohol consumption directly influences negotiator behavior ( Schweitzer & Gomberg , 2001 ) , 52 A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54and future work should explore the role of anxiety in both motivat- ing negotiators to consume alcohol as well as alcohol moderating the relationship between anxiety and negotiator behavior .
Finally , although our studies focused on the harmful effects of anxiety , it is possible that mild amounts of anxiety might actually improve negotiator performance .
The magnitude of anxiety may have profound effects on behavior .
For example , the Yerkes–Dod- son effect suggests a curvilinear relationship between arousal ( i.e. , stress ) and performance .
Though very low or very high levels of arousal may be debilitating , a moderate level of arousal may im- prove performance on difficult tasks like attention , memory , and problem solving ( e.g. , Anderson , Revelle , & Lynch , 1989 ; Lupien , Maheu , Tu , Fiocco , & Schramek , 2007 ; Yerkes & Dodson , 1908 ) .
Per- haps moderate amounts of anxiety can increase focus or trigger defensive pessimism ( Norem & Chang , 2002 ) .
As a result , some anticipatory anxiety may cause negotiators to prepare more thor- oughly .
Ultimately , though we identify harmful effects of anxiety for negotiators , mild amounts of anxiety may actually help Ner- vous Nelly negotiate .
Acknowledgements The authors thank Adam Grant , Deborah Small , Katherine Klein , Howard Kunreuther , Wendy Ham , Jihae Shin , and Adam Galinsky for helpful comments .
We are grateful for support of the Wharton Behavioral Lab and the Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes Center.Appendix A : .
Negotiation Aptitude Test ( to manipulate negotiator self-efficacy ) 1 .
Imagine that you want to purchase a house that has a list price of $ 500,000 , but comparable prices for homes range from $ 350,000 to $ 450,000 .
You can afford to pay $ 400,000 .
The housing market is rising ( house prices are increasing ) , and there are three other buyers interested in the same house .
Of the following options , which is best ?
a .
Wait for another buyer to make an initial offer .
b .
Offer $ 400,000 before the other buyers make offers .
c. Offer $ 350,000 before the other buyers make offers .
d. Look for a different house that has fewer interested buyers .
2 .
Imagine that you want to buy a house that has a list price of $ 200,000 , but comparable prices for homes range from $ 150,000 to $ 250,000 .
You can afford to pay $ 300,000 .
The housing market is falling ( house prices are decreasing ) , and there are three other buyers interested in the same house .
Of the following options , which is best ?
a .
Wait for another buyer to make an initial offer .
b .
Make a full-price offer of $ 200,000 before the other buy- ers make offers .
c. Offer $ 150,000 before the other buyers make offers .
d. Look for a different house that has fewer interested buyers .
3 .
Imagine you have been offered a new job .
The company has offered you a salary of $ 70,000/year .
New hires with similar experience , education , and skills are paid $ 75,000/year on average .
If you do not take the new job , you will go back on the job market , and the unemployment rate is 10 % ( very high ) .
You have no other outside options .
Of the following choices , which is best ?
a .
Tell the company you will only accept the job for $ 80,000/ year .
b .
Tell the company you will only accept the job for $ 75,000/ year.c .
Accept the offer at $ 70,000/year .
d. Reject the offer and go back on the job market.4 .
Imagine you have been offered a new job .
The company has offered you a salary of $ 70,000/year .
New hires with similar experience , background , education , and skills are paid $ 75,000/year on average .
If you do not take the new job , you will go back on the job market , and the unemployment rate is 1 % ( very low ) .
You have no other outside options .
Of the following choices , which is best ?
a .
Tell the company you will only accept the job for $ 80,000/ year .
b .
Tell the company you will only accept the job for $ 75,000/ year .
c. Accept the offer at $ 70,000/year .
d. Reject the offer and go back on the job market.5 .
Imagine that you are buying a new car .
You have found the exact car that you want , and the dealer has it in stock .
The list price is $ 35,000 , and from your research the dealer invoice is $ 28,000 .
You really like this car , and you would be willing to pay up to $ 35,000 for it .
You suspect that other buyers are interested in this same car and that the dealer- ship is not very eager to sell this car .
What amount would you make for your first offer ?
a .
$ 28 K. b .
$ 30 K. c. $ 33 K. d. Make the dealership offer the next price .
6 .
Imagine that you are buying a new car .
You have found the exact car that you want , and the dealer has it in stock .
The list price is $ 35,000 , and from your research the dealer invoice is $ 28,000 .
You really like this car , and you would be willing to pay up to $ 35,000 for it .
You suspect that other buyers are not interested in this same car and that the deal- ership is very eager to sell this car .
What amount would you make for your first offer ?
a .
$ 28 K. b .
$ 30 K. c. $ 33 K. d. Make the dealership offer the next price.7 .
Imagine that you are organizing a large party .
You are work- ing with a caterer for a sit-down dinner for 200 people .
The caterer is charging you $ 100 per person and asks you to commit to the exact number of guests .
This caterer is the best in town .
You can pay $ 20,000 , but you would prefer to pay less .
How would you respond to this caterer ?
a .
Pay full price to ensure good service .
b .
Offer the caterer $ 80 per person and commit to 200 people .
c. Offer the caterer $ 100 per person , but insist on paying for only the guests who show up .
d. Shop for alternative caterers to use as competitive leverage .
8 .
Imagine that you are organizing a large party .
You are work- ing with a caterer for a sit-down dinner for 200 people .
The caterer is charging you $ 100 per person and asks you to commit to the exact number of guests .
This caterer is NOT the best in town .
You can pay $ 20,000 , but you would prefer to pay less .
How would you respond to this caterer ?
a .
Pay full price to ensure good service .
b .
Offer the caterer $ 80 per person and commit to 200 people .
c. Offer the caterer $ 100 per person , but insist on paying for only the guests who show up .
d. Shop for alternative caterers to use as competitive leverage .
A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54 539 .
Imagine you are getting married to the man or woman of your dreams .
Your fiancé wants you to sign a prenuptial agreement before you wed because s/he is fairly wealthy .
In the case of divorce , the prenuptial offer is to split your wealth and assets 80 % for your spouse , 20 % for you because that is the ratio of your current wealth .
What should you do ?
a .
Agree to sign the prenuptial agreement with the 80/20 division .
b .
Agree to sign the prenuptial agreement only with a 50/50 division of wealth and assets to be equitable .
c. Consult with a lawyer and then make a counteroffer .
d. Refuse to sign the prenuptial agreement because mar- riage is about love , not material wealth .
10 .
To what extent are the following statements true ? a .
Almost always true b .
Often true c. Rarely true– In general , it is better to live with some conflict .
– Not all conflict needs to be managed .
– In reality , most things in life are negotiable .
– Many people are willing to provide the same goods or services for a lower price .
– If you offer someone a low price , they are likely to provide worse service or get insulted .
– When people say that a price is their absolute lowest price , they are telling the truth .
– Once people have their mind set on a certain deal , you can not change their mind .
References Adler , R. , Rosen , B. , & Silverstein , E. ( 1998 ) .
Emotions in negotiation : How to manage fear and anger .
Negotiation Journal , 1998 , 161–179 .
Allred , K. , Mallozzi , J. , Matsui , F. , & Raia , C. ( 1997 ) .
The influence of anger and compassion on negotiation performance .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 70 ( 3 ) , 175–187 .
Anderson , K. , Revelle , W. , & Lynch , M. ( 1989 ) .
Caffeine , impulsivity , and memory scanning : A comparison of two explanations for the Yerkes–Dodson effect .
Motivation and Emotion , 13 , 1–20 .
Babcock , L. , Gelfand , M. , Small , D. , & Stayn , H. ( 2006 ) .
Gender differences in the propensity to initiate negotiations .
In D. De Cremer , M. Zeelenberg , & J. K. Murnighan ( Eds .
) , Social psychology and economics ( pp .
239–262 ) .
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum .
Bandura , A .
( 1993 ) .
Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning .
Educational Psychologist , 28 ( 2 ) , 117–148 .
Baron , R. M. , & Kenny , D. A .
( 1986 ) .
The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological research : Conceptual , strategic and statistical considerations .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 , 1173–1182 .
Baron , R. , Fortin , S. , Frei , R. , Hauver , L. , & Shack , M. ( 1990 ) .
Reducing organizational conflict : The role of socially-induced positive affect .
International Journal of Conflict Management , 1 , 133–152 .
Barry , B .
( 2008 ) .
Negotiator affect : The state of the art ( and the science ) .
Group Decision and Negotiation , 17 , 97–105 .
Barry , B. , & Oliver , R. ( 1996 ) .
Affect in dyadic negotiation : A model and propositions .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 67 ( 2 ) , 127–143 .
Barsade , S. ( 2002 ) .
The ripple effect : Emotional contagion and its influence on group behavior .
Administrative Science Quarterly , 47 ( 4 ) , 644–675 .
Bazerman , M. , Curhan , J. , Moore , D. , & Valley , K. ( 2000 ) .
Negotiation .
Annual Review of Psychology , 51 , 279–314 .
Blount , S. , & Larrick , R. ( 2000 ) .
Framing the game : Examining frame choice in bargaining .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 81 , 43–71 .
Bolton , G. , & Zwick , R. ( 1995 ) .
Anonymity versus punishment in ultimatum bargaining .
Games and Economic Behavior , 10 , 95–121 .
Bottom , W. ( 1998 ) .
Negotiator risk : Sources of uncertainty and the impact of reference points on negotiated settlements .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Process , 76 , 89–112 .
Brophy , J .
( 1986 ) .
Teachers ’ influences on student achievement .
American Psychologist .
Brown , S. , & Volgsten , U .
( 2006 ) .
Music and manipulation : On the social uses and social control of music .
New York : Berghahn Books .
Costa , P. , & McCrae , R. ( 1992 ) .
Revised NEO Personality Inventory ( NEOPI-R ) and Neo Five-Factor Inventory ( NEO-FFI ) .
Florida : Psychological Assessment Resources .
De Dreu , C. , & Van Lange , P. ( 1995 ) .
The impact of social value orientation on negotiator behavior and cognition .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 21 , 1178–1188.Dunn , J. , & Schweitzer , M. ( 2005 ) .
Feeling and believing : The influence of emotion on trust .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 88 , 736–748 .
Endler , N. ( 1983 ) .
Interactionism : A personality model , but not yet a theory .
In M. M. Page ( Ed .
) , Nebraska symposium on motivation 1982 : Personality – Current theory and research .
Lincoln , NE : University of Nebraska Press .
Fehr , E. , & Schmidt , E. ( 1999 ) .
A theory of fairness , competition , and cooperation .
Quarterly Journal of Economics , 114 , 817–868 .
Forgas , J .
( 1998 ) .
On feeling good and getting your way : Mood effects on negotiator cognition and bargaining strategies .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 ( 3 ) , 565–577 .
Fredrickson , B. L. , & Branigan , C. ( 2005 ) .
Positive emotions broaden the scope of attention and thought–action repertoires .
Cognition and Emotion , 19 ( 3 ) , 313–332 .
Galinsky , A. , Seiden , V. , Kim , P. , & Medvec , V. ( 2002 ) .
The dissatisfaction of having your first offer accepted : The role of counterfactual thinking in negotiations .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 28 , 271–283 .
Giebels , E. , De Dreu , C. K. W. , & Van de Vliert , E. ( 2000 ) .
Interdependence in negotiation : Effects of exit options and social motive on distributive and integrative negotiation .
European Journal of Social Psychology , 30 , 255–272 .
Gray , J .
( 1991 ) .
Fear , panic , and anxiety : What ’ s in a name ?
Psychological Inquiry , 2 ( 1 ) , 77–78 .
Greenhalgh , L. ( 2002 ) .
Managing anxiety in negotiated decision-making .
Working Paper , Dartmouth .
Hatfield , E. , Cacioppo , J. , & Rapson , R. ( 1994 ) .
Emotional contagion .
Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press .
Kantor , L. , Endler , N. , Heslegrave , R. , & Kocovski , N. ( 2001 ) .
Validating self-report measures of state and trait anxiety against a physiological measure .
Current Psychology , 20 ( 3 ) , 207–215 .
Lenta , R. , Browna , S. , & Larkina , K. ( 1984 ) .
Relation of self-efficacy expectations to academic achievement and persistence .
Journal of Counseling Psychology , 31 ( 3 ) , 356–362 .
Lerner , J. , Small , D. , & Loewenstein , G. ( 2004 ) .
Heart strings and purse strings : Carryover effects of emotions on economic decisions .
Psychological Science , 15 , 337–341 .
Liebert , R. , Smith , W. , Hill , J. , & Keiffer , M. ( 1968 ) .
The effects of information and magnitude of initial offer on interpersonal negotiation .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 4 , 431–441 .
Lupien , S. , Maheu , F. , Tu , M. , Fiocco , Al. , & Schramek , T. ( 2007 ) .
The effects of stress and stress hormones on human cognition : Implications for the field of brain and cognition .
Brain and Cognition , 65 , 209–237 .
Marks , I. , & Nesse , R. ( 1994 ) .
‘ ‘ Fear and fitness : An evolutionary analysis of anxiety ’ ’ in the maladapted mind .
New York , NY : Elsevier Science Inc.. pp .
57–60 .
Moore , D. , & Cain , D. ( 2007 ) .
Overconfidence and underconfidence .
When and why people underestimate ( and overestimate ) the competition .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 103 , 197–213 .
Moran , S. , & Schweitzer , M. ( 2008 ) .
When better is worse : Envy and the use of deception .
Negotiation and Conflict Management Research , 1 , 3–29 .
Neale , M. , & Bazerman , M. ( 1991 ) .
Cognition and rationality in negotiation .
New York : Free Press .
Norem , J. K. , & Chang , E. C. ( 2002 ) .
The positive psychology of negative thinking .
Journal of Clinical Psychology , 58 , 993–1001 .
O ’ Connor , K. M. , Arnold , J .
A. , & Maurizio , A. M. ( 2010 ) .
The prospect of negotiating : Stress , cognitive appraisal , and performance .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 46 ( 5 ) , 729–735 .
Pham , M. ( 1998 ) .
Representativeness , relevance , and the use of feelings in decision making .
Journal of Consumer Behavior , 25 , 144–159 .
Pillutla , M. , & Murnighan , J .
( 1996 ) .
Unfairness , anger , and spite : emotional rejections of ultimatum offers .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 68 , 208–224 .
Pruitt , D. , & Carnevale , P. ( 1993 ) .
Negotiation in social conflict .
Buckingham , England : Open University Press .
Raghunathan , R. , & Pham , M. ( 1999 ) .
All negative moods are not equal : Motivational influences of anxiety and sadness on decision making .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 79 ( 1 ) , 56–77 .
Rapoport , A. , Budescu , D. , Erev , I. , & Zwick , R. ( 1998 ) .
Games and human behavior .
Mahwah , NJ , USA : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc. Robinson , M. , & Clore , G. ( 2002 ) .
Belief and feeling : Evidence for an accessibility model of emotional self-report .
Psychological Bulletin , 128 , 934–960 .
Rubinstein , A .
( 1982 ) .
Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model .
Econometrica , 50 , 97–109 .
Russell , J .
( 1980 ) .
A circumplex model of affect .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 39 ( 6 ) , 1161–1178 .
Schwarz , N. ( 1990 ) .
Feelings as information : Informational and motivational functions of affective states .
In E. Higgins & R. Sorrentino ( Eds .
) , Handbook of motivation and cognition : Foundations of social behavior .
New York : Guilford Press .
Schweitzer , M. , & Gomberg , L. ( 2001 ) .
The impact of alcohol on negotiator behavior : Experimental evidence .
Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 31 ( 10 ) , 2095– 2126 .
Schweitzer , M. , & Kerr , J .
( 2000 ) .
Bargaining under the influence .
The role of alcohol in negotiations .
Academy of Management Executive , 14 ( 2 ) , 47–57 .
Small , D. , Gelfand , M. , Babcock , L. , & Gettman , H. ( 2007 ) .
Who goes to the bargaining table ?
The influence of gender and framing on the initiation of negotiation .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 93 ( 4 ) , 600–613 .
Smith , C. , & Ellsworth , P. ( 1985 ) .
Patterns of cognitive appraisal in emotion .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 48 ( 4 ) , 813–838 .
54 A.W .
Brooks , M.E .
Schweitzer / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 ( 2011 ) 43–54Solnick , S. , & Schweitzer , M. ( 1999 ) .
The influence of physical attractiveness and gender on ultimatum game decisions .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 79 , 199–215 .
Spielberger , C. ( 1966 ) .
The effects of anxiety on complex learning and academic achievement .
In C. Spielberger ( Ed .
) , Anxiety and behavior ( pp .
361–398 ) .
New York : Academic Press .
Steinel , W. , Van Kleef , G. , & Harinck , F. ( 2008 ) .
Are you talking to me ? !
Separating the people from the problem when expressing emotions in negotiations .
Journal of Experimental social Psychology , 44 , 362–369 .
Sullivan , B. , O ’ Connor , K. , & Burris , E. ( 2005 ) .
Negotiator confidence : The impact of self-efficacy on tactics and outcomes .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 42 , 567–581 .
Sullivan , B .
A. , O ’ Connor , K. , & Burris , E. R. ( 2006 ) .
Negotiator confidence .
The impact of self-efficacy on tactics and outcomes .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 42 ( 5 ) , 567–581 .
Van Dijk , E. , Van Kleef , G. , Steinel , W. , & Van Beest , I .
( 2008 ) .
A social functional approach to emotions in bargaining : When communicating anger pays and when it backfires .
Journal of Personality and social Psychology , 94 , 600–614.Van Kleef , G. A. , De Dreu , C. K. W. , & Manstead , A. S. R. ( 2004 ) .
The interpersonal effects of anger and happiness in negotiations .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 86 , 57–76 .
Van Kleef , G. , De Dreu , C. , & Manstead , A .
( 2006 ) .
Supplication and appeasement in conflict and negotiation : The interpersonal effects of disappointment , worry , guilt , and regret .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 91 , 124–142 .
Weg , E. , Rapoport , A. , & Felsenthal , D. ( 1990 ) .
Two-person bargaining behavior in fixed discounting factors games with infinite horizon .
Games and Economic Behavior , 2 , 76–95 .
Wheeler , M. ( 2004 ) .
Anxious moments : Openings in negotiations .
Negotiation Journal , 2004 , 153–169 .
Yerkes , R. , & Dodson , J .
( 1908 ) .
The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation .
Journal of comparative Neurology and Psychology , 18 , 459– 482 .
Yukl , G. ( 1974 ) .
Effects of situational variables and opponent concessions on a bargainer ’ s perception , aspirations , and concessions .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 29 , 227–236 .
