C抬akmakl谋_AmJournSocio_2017_dGX2.pdf
aXGi8wAiLv.WmqC5Hq3l.3Ye8YO4-C_akmakl__AmJournSocio_2017_dGX2.pdf.plain.html

AllWhen Does Globalization Lead to Local Adaptation ?
The Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkey , 1985–20071Anıl Divarcı Çakmaklı Istanbul Şehir University Christophe Boone University of Antwerp Arjen van Witteloostuijn Tilberg UniversityThe f the ve co 201 002-9 1822 use subInstitutionalperspectives of globalizationenvision thehomogenization of theworld throughglobal cultural , economic , andpolitical dynamics , while glocalization theory highlights how local cultures may adapt or resist global forces .
On the basis of these theories , the authors analyze when , where , and why local hybrid organizational forms emerge as a reaction to globalization.They suggest that the impact of globalization on theemergenceandexpansionofhybridorganizational forms , which reflect localadaptationsofglobal forms , dependsonthree typesofmod- erators : ( 1 ) thefit between global and local ideas , values , andpractices ; ( 2 ) the experience of the local community with alternative organiza- tional forms ; and ( 3 ) the motivation of the local community to adapt .
The authors test their hypotheses with data from the high school ed- ucation system in Turkey from 1985 to 2007 , a period in which Tur- key experienced the growing impact of globalization.INTRODUCTION Globalization is often regarded as a formidable blending force , blurring boundaries between different cultures resulting in significant institutionalauthors gratefully acknowledge financial support through the Odysseus program Research Foundation—Flanders ( FWO ) .
We strongly appreciate the construc- mments of the AJS reviewers .
Direct correspondence to Anıl Divarcı Çakmaklı , 7 by The University of Chicago .
All rights reserved .
602/2017/12206-0005 $ 10.001 o ti © 0 AJS Volume 122 Number 6 ( May 2017 ) : 1822–68 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM ject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeyandculturalhomogenization ( RobertsonandKhonder1998 ) .Althoughglob- alization has a number of different dimensions and meanings , the diffusion of cultural models and ideas is seen as a central feature ( Meyer 2000 ; Kern 2010 ) .
Guillén ( 2001 , p. 236 ) , referring to Held et al .
( 1999 , p. 16 ) , defines globalization as “ a process fueled by , and resulting in , increasing cross- border flows of goods , money , information , and culture .
.
.
leading to greater interdependence andmutual awareness ( reflexivity ) among economic , polit- ical , and social units in theworld , and among actors in general. ” There seems to be little dispute about the fact that “ in many areas of social life , common models organized in world discourse arise and penetrate social life world- wide ” ( Meyer 2000 , p. 234 ) .
At the same time , however , a paradox emerges as this process goes hand in hand with the growing importance of the par- ticularities of local communities in shaping local cultural adaptations ( Mar- quis and Battilana 2009 ) .
In line with this paradox , more recent accounts of the globalization pro- cess underscore the dialectical tension between the global and the local .
In- creasing global interdependence is not only a boundary-blurring force but it might also demarcate boundaries between the global and the local more sharply—for instance , when globalization represents a threat to local tra- ditions ( Marquis and Battilana 2009 , p. 284 ) .
Clearly , globalization is a very complex process involving the simultaneous operation of global blending and local segregating forces .
Globalization comes with a subtle interaction of tendencies toward universalism and particularism ( Robertson andKhon- der 1998 , p. 28 ) , produces homogenization and heterogenization ( Brady , Beckfield , and Zhao 2007 , p. 317 ) , and is associated with clashes , conflicts , and tensions between Western and non-Western concepts of globalization ( Robertson and Khonder 1998 , p. 29 ) .
The implication is that different ver- sions of modernity might emerge depending on the specific interplay be- tween the global and the local .
Given that globalization is an ideology , subject to local contestation by ac- tors andmovements thatmake distinct claims aboutmodernization ( Guillén 2001 ) , an important question is to understand how andwhen global cultural or cognitive models diffuse in local communities ( Schneiberg and Clemens 2006 ; Marquis and Battilina 2009 ) .
There is a long tradition in institutional theory that studies the impact of higher-order institutions on lower-level out- comes ( Schneiberg andClemens 2006 ; Scott 2008 ) , includinghow the emerg- ing global polity affects nation-states and organizations ( e.g. , Meyer et al .
1997 ; for a review , see Schneiberg and Clemens [ 2006 ] ) .
An understudied is- sue , however , is howglobalization affects the local emergence of neworgani-Istanbul Şehir University , Altunizade Mh .
Kuşbakışı Cd .
No : 27 , 34662 , Istanbul , Turkey .
E-mail : anildivarci @ sehir.edu.tr 1823 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allzational forms or , more generally , how the coevolution of institutions andor- ganizations affects institutional and social change ( Haveman andRao 1997 , 2006 ; Marquis and Lounsbury 2007 ; Schneiberg , King , and Smith 2008 ) .
This is an important omission given that organizations are major carriers of ideology , playing an important role in the diffusion of ideas and values .
Organization-building processes fuel ideological struggles and therefore are importantmediatorsof societal change ( Barnett andWoywode2004 ; Simons and Ingram 2004 ; Haveman , Rao , and Paruchuri 2007 ) .
We address this gap by building on globalization and institutional theory to develop an organizational ecology of the founding process of hybrid or- ganizational forms that combine the templates and values of different par- ent forms .
We focus on hybrid forms because most institutional change is the result of the transposition , hybridization , and recombination ofmaterials provided by existing institutions ( Djelic and Sahlin-Andersson 2006 ; Have- man and Rao 2006 ; Schneiberg and Clemens 2006 ) .
Specifically , we argue that globalization spurs the emergence of new hybrid organizational forms as a way for local communities to adjust to environmental uncertainty and episodic change ( Hannan and Freeman 1989 ; Minkoff 2002 ; Haveman and Rao 2006 ) .
By combining aspects of globalization with features of local tem- plates , hybrid organizations embody alternative institutional practices that allow actors in local communities to solve the potential tensions between the global and the local ( Schneiberg and Clemens 2006 ) .
As globalization acts as a boundary-blurring force triggering ( partial ) institutional convergence across the globe , our baseline expectation is that globalization goes hand in handwith the emergenceandexpansionof suchhybridorganizational forms .
However , we argue that local conditions play an important role in this process .
As the word “ glocal ” implies , the impact of globalization depends on the interpenetration of global forces and local responses ( Robertson and Khonder 1998 ) .
We follow recent developments in institutional theory that move away from envisioning the institutional environment as a geography- independent organizational field inwhichmimetic processes unfold that lead to convergence ( Schneiberg andClemens 2006 ; Marquis andBatillana 2009 ) .
In contrast , to understand the emergence of alternative templates , multilevel models are needed that theorize about how thehigher-order context interacts with local conditions in shaping multiple outcomes ( Schneiberg et al .
2008 ; Boone andÖzcan2014 ) .Herewe claim that the extent towhich globalization spurs the emergence of hybrid organizational forms will depend on specific place-bound features of local communities that affect the latter ’ s susceptibil- ity to adapt to processes of globalization ( Marquis and Battilana 2009 ) .
Specifically , we propose that three different types of local-level modera- tor conditions will block or ease the adaptation process .
Thus these types of conditions will affect whether or not universalism is blended with local par- ticularism resulting in the proliferation of specific hybrid organizational1824 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeyforms ( Marquis and Battilana 2009 ) : ( 1 ) the resonance , or lack thereof , of universal values with local traditions ( local resistance ; Kern 2010 ) ; ( 2 ) the ( non ) availability of the parent form templates in local communities ( local templates ; Minkoff 1994 , 2002 ; Schneiberg and Clemens 2006 ; Schneiberg 2007 ) ; and ( 3 ) the absence or presence of local incentives that trigger mobi- lizing forces to overcome the obstacles of hybrid form emergence ( local in- centives ; Hasenfeld and Gidron 2005 ) .
Thesemoderators are chosen as prior institutional research indicates that they are likely to strongly affect the susceptibility of local communities to adapt to globalization pressures .
Indeed , related research on the adoption and diffusion of field-level contested innovations and institutional logics does underscore the importance of the potential adopters ’ incentives and cultural fit ( Kennedy andFiss 2009 ; Ansari , Fiss , andZajac 2010 ; Fiss , Ken- nedy , and Davis 2012 ) .
Similarly , mainly qualitative research reveals that institutional change and the emergence of new templates are often consti- tuted from building blocks of locally available existing institutions ( Schnei- berg and Clemens 2006 ) .
Our empirical context is theTurkish high school system in the period from 1985 to 2007 .
Education is an appropriate setting as educational systems ex- perience strong homogenizing pressures due to globalization ( Meyer et al .
1997 ) , whichGuillén ( 2001 , p. 244 ) refers to as “ theworldwide spread of con- formism in educational systems. ” Turkey is an interesting case studybecause there is a strong tension between the global Western version of modernism and local Islamic traditions , which is fueled by local religious polarization and secular-Islamic contestation.2 A growing number of so-calledAnatolian Imam Hatip schools can be regarded as a hybrid school form because they combine the curricula of two other school forms : Anatolian and ImamHatip high schools .
The former can be identified as cosmopolitan high schools whose educational curriculumembodies secularist andWestern-oriented val- ues , while the latter are traditional religious high schools ( Boone , Divarci , and van Witteloostuijn 2011 ) .
Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools are reli- gious high schools , which also provide aWestern type of education in foreign languages .
Because there is considerable geographic heterogeneity in Tur- key , we can study how the interplay between universalism ( the extent of globalization at the national level ) and different local ( district-level ) partic- ularistic characteristics affects the founding rate of hybrid high schools ( An- atolian Imam Hatip high schools ) at the local ( district ) level.2 Our references to “ global ” and “ local ” do not imply that the local is without any global aspects .
After all , Islam is a religion that operates globally and that has been and still is very influential in a global context .
Rather , for the sake of the argument , we use “ global ” and “ globalization ” as defined in much of the literature , with reference to Western cul- tural , economic , and political orientations .
1825 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology AllOur key contribution is that we examine organizations as carriers of ide- ologies related to globalization , emphasizing their important role in how communities adapt to and affect institutional change .
This important role of organizations has been underemphasized in prior work in organizational sociology ( Haveman and Rao 2006 ) .
Consequently , we focus on the impact of themacrolevel globalization process on themicrolevel emergence of orga- nizational forms in a comparative context of different communities , empha- sizing the role of local agency , interest , and resistance .
Our study is a re- sponse to the “ plea .
.
.
for a comparative sociology of globalization that is sensitive to local variations and to how agency , interest , and resistance me- diate the relationship between globalization causes and outcomes ” ( Guillén 2001 , p. 235 ) .
This research is required as we lack “ theoretical perspectives that bridge themicro-macro gap , i.e. , thatmoveacross levels of analysis from the world system to the nation-state , the industry , sector , community , orga- nization , andgroup .
.
.
.We still know little about .
.
.
its consequences on such key sociological variables as organizational patterns ” ( p. 255 ) .
We find considerable support for the global-local interaction hypotheses about the emergence of hybrid high schools in Turkey , which clearly un- derscores the saliency of recent pleas of institutional theorists that dynamic analyses of institutions and change require a focus on heterogeneity and the emergence of alternative templates ( Schneiberg and Clemens 2006 ) .
Before we present our context-specific hypotheses , we first provide a rich descrip- tion of the dynamics of the Turkish high school system in a country that has experienced growing religious polarization together with a rising intercon- nectedness with the world system.SEGREGATING AND BLENDING FORCES IN TURKEY A Century of Religious Polarization in Turkey Even though the official history of Turkey as a nation-state begins with the foundation of the secular republic in 1923 , with Mustafa Kemal Ataturk as its first president , the beginning of Turkish modernity can be traced back to 1839with the start of theTanzimat era ( Kaya 2004 ) .3 During this era , theOt- toman intelligentsia began to question the reasons behind the superiority of the West .
This led to the emergence of new intellectual groups such as the Young Ottomans , who established the first constitutional regime in 1876 .
This era already includes the traces of the Kemalist modernization project .
For example , secularism became an important topic of discussion in this pe- riod ( Kaya 2004 ) .
The Tanzimat era ended in 1878 .
Three decades later , the3 This can be translated as the “ reforms ” era .
1826 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in TurkeyYoung Turks ( a new group based on the ideas of the Young Ottomans ) suc- ceeded to establish the second constitutional regime by launching a military coup in 1908 and formed the first modern political party , İttihat Terakki .
Although the establishment of this second constitutional regime solved some of the problems in society , it also paved the way for a tradition of military coups in the history of the Turkish Republic ( Kaya 2004 ) .
The reforms dur- ing the Tanzimat period included transformations of many institutions , in- cluding the education system .
Although the transformed education system was still centered on religion , the bureaucrats of the Tanzimat era also in- cluded positive sciences in the curricula in addition to the religious courses , in order to increase the quality of education ( Somel 2001 ) .
As amilitary officer influenced by theYoungTurks , Ataturk tried to trans- form the remains of the Ottoman Empire into a modern , Western-oriented state , based on secular principles with reforms that , for example , unified ed- ucation , abolished the Sharia , and introduced a modern Swiss-inspired civil code after the foundation of the Turkish Republic in 1923 .
Gender equality was formally recognized , andwomen obtained the right to vote and become elected in parliament .
These reforms were accompanied by several cultural and symbolic measures such as the replacement of Arabic by Latin script and theprohibition againstwearing a fez.TheKemalistmodernizationproj- ect represented a major revolution in a basically conservative and tradi- tional Islamic society .
During the single-party era , however , there was no room for competing ideas or for any platform to express social discontent ( Zürcher 2004 ) .
The interpretation of secularism in this era was not limited to the separation of the state and religion , but also involved the removal of religion from public life and control over religious institutions ( Zürcher 2004 ) .
Therefore , it is no surprise that religious opposition arose from the very be- ginning ( Zürcher 2004 ) .
In fact , the Kemalist reforms lie at the very origin of the gradual rise of political Islam in the second half of the 20th century ( Sakallıoğlu 1996 ; Önis 1997 ; Güven 2005 ) .
Military officers and civilian bureaucrats—the major power holders in the authoritarian state—imposed the westernization project unilaterally during the single-party era in the republic ’ s history until 1946 ( Sakallıoğlu 1996 ) .
Eventually , so much contention arose that the state had to allow par- ties other than the Republican People ’ s Party into the political arena at the end of World War II .
The importance of the opposition is demonstrated by the huge victory of the center-right Democratic Party ( DP ) , which gained 53.4 % of the votes in the 1950 elections—a party that claimed to represent the periphery against the secular , bureaucratic intelligentsia .
One of the first actions of the new government was to relax the dominance of secularism that had been a feature of the single-party era ( Zürcher 2004 ) .
The govern- ment introduced voluntary religious courses into primary schools , restored1827 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allthe Arabic instead of the Turkish call to prayer , and established Imam Hatip ( i.e. , preacher ) schools and a faculty of divinity at Ankara University .
For the secularists who had internalized Kemalist principles—such as civil servants , academics , and military officers—this relaxation was a threat to their cultural and political hegemony ( Zürcher 2004 ) .
The DP government ended in 1960 with a military coup .
The Turkish army has always considered itself the guardian of Kemalist principles and was uncomfortable with the DP ’ s policies .
The DP was closed down and banned from politics .
After the army handed over power to a newly elected government in 1961 , a period of liberalization followed .
The 1960s were a decade in which ideologies clashed and became a matter of public debate ( Landau 1997 ) .
In 1970 , the National Order Party ( NOP ) , the first pro-Islamic party of theTurkishRepublic , was founded .
Even thoughNOP ’ s party pro- gram emphasized democratic values , the party firmly stood for freedom of religion and Islamic education .
As the party also rejected any type of secu- larism that could be perceived as being hostile toward Islam ( Landau 1997 ) , it offered a voice to religious and conservative people ( Güven 2005 ) .
How- ever , the NOP was banned in 1971 because it violated the secularist princi- ples of theTurkishConstitution.The role of religion in public lifewas not the only source of polarization in Turkey during the 1970s .
Economic recessions led to social unrest , and different factions at both the extreme left and right emerged to fight for the control of the streets and campuses ( Zürcher 2004 ) .
To end this state of chaos , the military took over again in 1971 .
After the military intervention of 1971 , successive governments failed to solve Turkey ’ s economic and political problems.Many political parties and socialmovements emerged representing various ideologies , ranging from ex- treme left to extreme right , including religious sects andKurdish separatists .
Most of these groups strongly opposed the repressive Kemalist ideology .
These developments expanded the boundaries of pluralism in Turkish soci- ety and generated polarization along ideological lines .
The end result was escalating violence and a new military coup in 1980 ( Pak 2004 ) .
Although one of the aims of the military leaders of the 1980 coup was to defend the Kemalist principles , this time the underlyingmotivationwas quite different .
The leaders “ defined the causes of the socio-political problems as a lack of religious dignity and the domination of a left-wing discourse in society ” ( Güven 2005 , p. 198 ) .
They realized that the Kemalist ideology did not reso- nate well among the majority of the Turkish population and that religion could be used as a unifying power against the fragmentation and contesta- tion caused by the rise of leftists , socialists , radical religious sects , ultrana- tionalists , and Kurdish separatists ( Ahmad 1991 ; Salt 1995 ; Pak 2004 ) .
The aim was to create a more homogeneous and less political Islamic com- munity ( Yavuz 1997 ) .
Consequently , the military government made tactical concessions to religious interests not only to secure their support but also to1828 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeygain official control over religious issues , including the role of religion in ed- ucation .
This action contributed to the rise of political Islam and the development of anew ideological concept , the “ Turkish Islamic synthesis , ” whichwascon- structedbyagroupof conservative scholars ( Yavuz1997 ; Güven2005 ) .This ideology , supported by the center-rightMotherland Party representing a di- verse electorate , attempted toassimilate Islamicgroupsandnationalists.The aim was to integrate Islamic symbols with nationalism and , by so doing , to create a more homogeneous and less political Islamic society and to avoid the influence of left-wing ideologies ( Rabasa and Larrabee 2008 ) .
The in- fluence of religion in public life strongly increased as a result of these devel- opments .
The rise of political Islam eventually culminated in the victory of the Islamic Welfare Party in the 1995 elections and the appointment of the first Islamic prime minister ( Necmettin Erbakan ) of the Turkish Republic .
The result of the election “ revealed a society sharply divided along secular versus Islamist sociocultural lines ” ( Yavuz 1997 , p. 63 ) .
Since the 1990s , the relationship between politics and religion has become an increasingly important issue inTurkish society as a result of the rise of Is- lam—politically , economically , andculturally ( Keyman2007 ) .Politically , re- ligionbecamepoliticized through the rise topowerof Islam-inspiredpolitical parties .
Economically , “ Anatolian tigers ” emerged , aswitnessedby the foun- dation ofMUSIAD ( Independent Industrialists ’ andBusinessmen ’ s Associ- ation ) , a business association of religiously conservative businessmen from Anatolia that aims to combine free-marketpractices and traditional religious values.4 Culturally , the demands of the religious sects increased , symbolized bytheplea tohaveheadscarvesaccepted inpublicorganizationsorat theuni- versities ( Keyman 2007 ) .
However , the growing antisecular rhetoric and ac- tivities of those in power disappointed and agitated secular public opinion .
This resulted in an escalation of the tension and antagonism between both factions ( Heper and Güney 2000 ; Güven 2005 ) .
For secularists , defying Kemalist principles is a threat fordemocracy , culture , and the republic , while theIslamicoppositionwants to “ de-Kemalize ” culture and in order to obtain freedom of expression of religion in public life ( Aydın and Çolak 2004 ) .
The politicization of Islam , in turn , further triggered the fear of secularists about the manifestation of religion in public life ( Aydın and Çolak 2004 ) .
This is demonstrated by the establishment of several movement and countermove- ment organizations in this era , leading to increasing polarization , dividing Turkey into two dominant factions ( underpinned by many smaller ones ) that are clearly distinct : a secular and a religious one.4 The term “ Anatolian tigers ” refers to a number of cities in Turkey that have displayed impressive growth since the 1980s .
1829 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology AllThe Blending Force of Globalization in Turkey Ever since the foundation of the Turkish Republic , the country has been go- ing througheconomicandsocial changes thatoriginally tookroot in thewest- ernizationmovementofOttomansociety in the19thcentury.However , these changes have brought along their own internal conflicts ( Çarkoğlu andTop- rak 2007 ) .
Specifically , this process of change created conflict between the supporters of Western-style modernization and the countermovements re- actingagainst suchwesternization.Moreover , eventhoughTurkishmodern- ization has been a project of the state since the foundation of the Turkish Republic , the integration of the Turkish economy into the global market- place began only in the 1980s with economic liberalization ( Keyman and Koyuncu 2005 ) .
Turgut Ozal , the nineteenth prime minister of Turkey and one of the ar- chitects of the Turkish Islamic synthesis , introduced a series of transforma- tive policies paving the way for economic liberalization , as well as the rees- tablishment of parliamentary democracy after the 1980 military coup .
The aim of the economic policies of this period was to shift from a protectionist and import-substitution approach to a liberal and market-oriented strategy instead ( Harrison , Rutherford , and Tarr 1993 ) .
The reason behind this rad- ical shift was the fact that the Turkish economy had been suffering from structural constraints to growth for some years .
The solution introduced by the liberal government was the integration of the Turkish economy into the world capitalist system ( Ardiç 2009 ) .
This integration process was not only initiated by government policies but also stimulated through structural adjustment programs organized by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank ( Cizre and Yeldan 2005 ) .
As a result of the liberalization policies , Turkey developed economic relationships with several countries and gained access to a range of export markets .
However , rapid economic development required large capital imports because domestic savings were insufficient for the required investment .
In this period , foreign investors were attracted by Turkey ’ s great economic potential and increasingly lib- eral economic policies ; as a result , the amount of foreign capital invested in Turkey increased rapidly ( Ardıç 2009 ) .
The globalization process that took off with Turkey ’ s integration into global capitalism also had political and social consequences .
First , the eco- nomic international relations of Turkey improved through increasing trade and foreign direct investment .
Second , as a consequence of economic devel- opment andadvanced communication technologies , global connectivity and global consciousness increased .
The most prominent reflections of global culture in Turkey can be seen in the patterns of consumption and in the life- style of its inhabitants ( Helvacioglu 2000 ) .
The global cultural ideas andprac- tices began to spread bymeans ofmassmedia .
Globalization acted as a blend-1830 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeying forcebyblurring thedistinctions betweenTurkey and the rest of theworld , increasing the interconnectedness of the country with global norms , values , and practices .
The impact of globalization on theTurkish society is illustrated infigure 1 , which plots the KOF ( Konjunkturforschungsstelle ) globalization index for Turkey for the period 1970–2007 ( on a scale of 1–100 each year , with higher numbers indicating more globalization ) .
This index was first presented in 2002 ( Dreher 2006 ) and measures the extent of globalization of a country along three dimensions : economic , political , and social .
It is well suited for our purpose as it closely matches recent definitions of globalization , that is , the extent of global interconnectedness of a country among economic , polit- ical , and social units ( Guillén 2001 ) .
Subsequent empirical work has shown that the KOF index is a valid measure of a country ’ s extent of globalization ( see the methods section for a discussion ) .
The KOF index covers 123 coun- tries and includes 23 variables , underscoring the fact that globalization is a multifaceted concept .
The data were obtained from the website of the Swiss Economic Institute ( http : //www.kof.ethz.ch/ ) .
Figure 1 illustrates that globalization started to accelerate in Turkey around 1985 ( see also Cizre and Yeldan 2005 ) .
All KOF indices rapidly in- creased until 1994 and subsequently continued to grow incrementally until the end of the period , by and large , revealing the influential impact of the globalization wave .
The rise of political Islam together with increasing globalization and the implementation of neoliberal policies led to the emergence of an alternative , non-Western modernity—a religious/modern synthesis—espoused by the so- called new “ devout bourgeois class ” ( Demir , Acar , and Toprak 2004 ) .
As a consequence of neoliberal economic policies starting in the “ Ozal period , ” many religiously conservative cities , suchasDenizli , Konya , andKayseri , ex-FIG .
1.—KOF globalization index and its three dimensions for Turkey , 1970–20071831 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allperiencedrapideconomicgrowthanddevelopment.By improving theirbusi- ness practices , small and medium-sized enterprises in those cities prospered and formednewbusiness communities ( Demir et al .
2004 ) .
Economic liberal- ization strongly increased economic productivity and capital accumulation in Anatolia .
The emergence of the Anatolian tigers contributed to thewealth of the relatively religious and conservative faction that resides in Anatolia .
These developments made it clear to more conservative and religious people that globalization , economic growth , and Islam are not necessarily contradictory , but can be synthesized instead ( Özbudun and Keyman 2002 ) .
Indeed , the religious faction started to criticize “ the status of the secular- rational thinking as the exclusive source of modernity in Turkey ” ( Keyman andKoyuncu2005 , p.110 ) .Thedevoutbourgeoisclassusedmodernmethods of business and demanded more political freedom yet wanted to realize this without losing its religious identity ( Demir et al .
2004 ) .
The emergence of this new class was also reflected institutionally in the emergence of new school forms , businessassociations , andsocialmovements.Someof theprominent ex- amples are the diffusion of Islamic banks ( interest-free banking ) and the emergence of MUSIAD .
These developments fueled the tension between the secular elites , who embracedWestern modernity , and the new rising elite class striving for a religious/modern synthesis.Implications for the Turkish High School System Given that high schools are the cradle for future elites , religious contention and the rising tension between different forms of modernism had an enor- mous impact on the dynamics of the Turkish high school system .
As educa- tion is an extremely important vehicle for the diffusion of values and ideol- ogies in societies ( Nielsen and Hannan 1977 ) , the educational system was and remains a major battlefield ( see Güven 2005 ) , where all these tensions materialize via the establishment of different school types that carry these different ideologies .
Traditionally , there are three types of high schools that prepare students for higher education inTurkey : regular high schools , Anatolian high schools ( both secular ) , and Imam Hatip high schools.5 Regular high schools are the dominant type inTurkey.Theseare thebasichigh schools thatdonot require any entrance exam .
Anatolian high schools admit their students on the basis of the nationwide high school entrance score , and they provide education in foreign languages .
In addition , Anatolian high schools provide higher-There are also private high schools in Turkey .
However , in this article , we focus on the ublic high schools that do not require any tuition .
Private schools constituted a meager % of all high schools in Turkey as of 2007 ( National Education Statistics , published by5 p 1 the Turkish Ministry of National Education ) .
1832 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeyquality education than the other two types , and their curriculum embodies secularist andWestern-orientedvalues.ThefirstAnatolianhighschoolswere established by the government in 1955 as alternatives to international ( e.g. , French , German , or Italian ) high schools that provided high-quality and for- eign language education in Turkey.6 In the meantime , as the impact of glob- alization intensified , these schools became more and more popular among the secular faction mainly because these schools do not force any type of re- ligion on the students and at the same time provide high-quality education including foreign languages—both seen as a first step for a student to be- come connected to the rest of the world .
On the other side of the ideological spectrum , Imam Hatip high schools provide religious education .
Although the aim of Ataturk was to provide one unified , secular educational system , one of the major strategies of the Is- lamic movement was the creation of a counterelite by gradually strengthen- ing the Islamic stream in the educational system ( Güven 2005 ) .7 As a result , during the 20th century , the number of ImamHatip high schools expanded so much that duality in education became a fact ( Güven 2005 ) .
Depending on the ruling government ’ s views , the ImamHatip schools went through sev- eral changes over time.While some governments saw them as a threat to sec- ularism and therefore tookmeasures toweaken them , others viewed themas a tool to stimulate Islamicdiscourseandhence tookmeasures todevelop them further ( Özgür 2012 ) .
Even though ImamHatip high schools were originally founded to educate imams and preachers , because of the resurgence of Islam during the 1950s and after a series of regulatory changes ( Pak 2004 ) , Imam Hatip high schools have become regular educational institutions , preparing students for higher education.8 The main characteristic of Imam Hatip high schools is that they provide vocational courses as well as standard arts and science classes .
Secularists perceived the expansion of both the mission and number of Imam Hatip6 The state was suspicious that students of foreign schools would be influenced too much by foreign values and would be insufficiently aware of their own history and culture .
Therefore , the Turkish state decided to establish its own cosmopolitan schools .
7 Ataturk ’ s aim was to keep religion and religious activities under the control of the sec- ular state ; this strategy also extended to the educational system .
The Ottoman Empire had a multiplicity of schools , which all had a religious component in their curriculum ( Somel 2001 ) .
After the foundation of the Turkish Republic , with the Unification of Ed- ucation Law in 1924 , all educational institutions in Turkey became controlled by the state ( Özgür 2012 ) .
8 The roots of Imam Hatip high schools can be traced back to the madrassas in the Ot- toman Empire .
Many of the madrassas also went through transformations , particularly during the late Ottoman period , because of the erosion of their qualities and increasing relations with the West .
In this sense , already in the Ottoman Empire Imam Hatip high schools had hybrid features combining religious education with regular Western-oriented high school education .
1833 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allhigh schools as a threat , because a growing number of young people were not educated to become an imamor a preacher , but instead “ potential agents of Islamic traditionalism and a potential source of votes for traditional- fundamentalist politicians ” ( Sezer 1993 , pp .
23–24 ) .
Indeed , the graduates of ImamHatiphigh schools gradually entered elite functions inmany sectors of Turkish society ( Dorian 1997 ) .
As might be expected , Imam Hatip high schools arepopularamongreligiousparentswhowant their children tobe re- ligiously educated in addition to receiving standard schooling , while Anato- lian high schools are preferred by parents who want their children to be ed- ucated in line with secular/cosmopolitan norms ( Pak 2004 ) .
In 1985 , a new school form emerged in theTurkish education system : An- atolian Imam Hatip high schools—a combination of the curriculum of the Anatolian high schools with that of the Imam Hatip–inspired religious ed- ucation ( Pak 2004 ) .
As a result , Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools can be seen as a hybrid school form .
The Imam Hatip high schools include sub- stantial religious education in addition to the standard arts and science clas- ses while they provide scant English-language training .
For the newly emerged devout bourgeois class , the question was which type of education they wanted their children to have .
Because of the intensification of globali- zation , ImamHatip high schools lost their attractiveness to religious parents because these schools could not accommodate the upcoming global values , norms , and practices .
The new hybrid high school form offered a solution by including religious education along with the high-quality foreign lan- guage education essential in allowing their graduates to connect with the rest of theworld.Yet , unlike Anatolian high schools , the curriculumofAnatolian Imam Hatip high schools includes courses such as Arabic , theology , and holy Qur ’ an as well as standard courses like mathematics and natural sci- ences ( TurkishMinistry of Education , General Directorate of Religious Ed- ucation ) .
In parallel to the changes in the world and in Turkish society , con- servative and religious parents preferred their children be educated in modern schools that taught foreign languages , had computer labs , and of- fered sports facilities ( Gökaçtı 2005 ) .
For these parents , having their chil- dren learn to speak at least one foreign language , acquire the knowledge necessary to use up-to-date technology , and become aware of what is going on in the world were important , next to religious knowledge ( Gökaçtı 2005 ) .
Together with the intensification of the impact of globalization , the num- ber of Anatolian ImamHatip high schools increased rapidly .
Figures 2 and 3 provide the relative densities of the different school forms .
As can be seen from the figures , the dominant high school type inTurkey is the regular high school .
In 2007 , 55 % of all public high schools were regular high schools , but this percentage had dropped dramatically from 72 % in 1985 .
In the ex- panding periphery of the regular high school system , the prominent school types include Anatolian ( 5 % in 1985 and 25 % in 2007 ) , ImamHatip ( 23 % in1834 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkey1985 and 14 % in 2007 ) , and Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools ( only one school in 1985 and 6 % in 2007 ) .
The relative importance of both Anatolian and Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools substantially increased over time ( also demonstrated by their growing densities ; see fig .
2 ) , at the expense of the dominant regular high schools and the traditional Imam Hatip high schools ( for which growth seems to stagnate ) .
Figure 3 exhibits the growing popularity of Anatolian ImamHatip high schools among the religious faction .
What makes the Turkish high school system highly appropriate for our purposes is that the growth of the density of Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools varies widely across localities in Turkey , defined as districts .
Hence , below , we develop hypotheses thatmay explain this geographical variation , both inandover time.That is , we formulatehypotheses specific for theTurk-FIG .
2.—The density of regular high schools , 1985–2007FIG .
3.—The density of ImamHatip , Anatolian , and hybrid high schools , 1985–20071835 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allish high school context , focusing on the district-level founding rate of hybrid Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools as our dependent variable.THE EMERGENCE OF HYBRID HIGH SCHOOLS Globalization Push The boundaries of different organizational forms are determined by the bal- ance between segregating and blending mechanisms because continuity among organizational populations depends on the relative strength of both opposing forces ( HannanandFreeman1989 , p. 60 ) .While segregatingmech- anisms separate organizations into distinct forms by reifying differences , blending mechanisms blur distinctions between organizational forms by re- ifying similarities ( Hannan and Freeman 1989 ; Haveman and Rao 2006 ) .
If blending mechanisms are strong , distinctions among forms are relatively arbi- traryandeasily bridged.Thus , opportunities forhybridorganizational forms are created that combine the institutional logic materialized in two or more organizational forms ( Hannan and Freeman 1989 ; Haveman and Rao 2006 ) .
According to institutional theory , globalization acts as a blending force by spreading cosmopolitan values , practices , and institutions through iso- morphic processes ( Meyer et al .
1997 ; Boli and Thomas 1999 ; Schneiberg andClemens 2006 ) .
States derivemuch of their structure and authority from being embedded in a global world , which consists of common legitimating models .
Meyer et al .
( 1997 , p. 169 ) argued that “ instead of a central actor , the culture ofworld societyallocates responsible andauthoritative actorhood to nation-states. ” Therefore , globalization provides the necessary templates for nation-states and hence affects the evolution of organizational forms .
Fol- lowing this argument , we propose that globalization spurs local communi- ties to adapt by adopting hybrid organizational forms .
Despite the pressure for global convergence of education systems ( Meyer andHannan 1979 ; Meyer , Bromley , andRamirez 2010 ) , schools are still one of the most important vehicles for nation building and the reproduction of national ideologies ( Nielsen and Hannan 1977 ; Saito 2011 ) .
Subsequently , nation-states face a dilemma in terms of which institutional logic to adopt , that is , the global or the local .
The resolution for this contradiction often re- sides in adapting the existing institutional arrangements by blending dif- ferent institutional logics ( Marquis andBattilana 2009 ) .
Oneway is to adopt particular features from the global organizational form and to blend these with the existing local ones .
By building hybrid school forms , local commu- nities avoid radical institutional change and gradually adapt to the global- ization of the school system ( Haveman and Rao 2006 ; Saito 2011 ) .
In the slipstreamofTurkey ’ s accelerating integration in the globalmarket economy in the 1980s ( Cizre and Yeldan 2005 ) , global norms , values , and1836 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeypractices began to spread to all spheres of life , including the education system ( Meyer et al .
1997 ) .
As a result of these developments , the traditional educa- tion provided by Imam Hatip high schools began to fall short .
Particularly , the newly emerging devout bourgeois class realized that education not only serves to diffuse and strengthen religious norms but should also prepare their children to acquire the necessary competencies and skills to become world citizens ( Saito2011 ) .
Inorder tobepartof the futureelite inaglobalizingworld , standard education combined with religious education does not suffice any- moreas theoppositional secular elite enjoinshigh-qualityeducation—adapted to globalization practices—at Anatolian high schools .
These developments increased demand for hybrid schooling in Turkey ( high-quality cosmopolitan education embedded in Islamic traditions ) and triggered the establishment of Anatolian ImamHatip high schools .
This de- mand is met in two ways .
First , the Turkish Ministry of Education , which is responsible for top-down decisions about the location , number , and type of high schools to be established in the different districts , takes into account the needs of local communities .
Second , bottom-up , the local community can request a certain type of school in their district by making a demand to the corresponding governor , who in turn transmits this request to the Ministry ofEducation.Moreover , if the local community donates the necessary build- ings and equipment to the state for a new school , then the government gives permission for the founding of the school and assigns teaching staff .
As a re- sult , the founding process of high schools in Turkey is both a top-down and a bottom-up process , implying that both local conditions and local collective actions are important drivers of new school formation.9 HYPOTHESIS 1.—The district-level founding rate of hybrid high schools ( Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools ) increases with globalization.Local Resistance The globalization process in Turkey takes place in a society that historically has strong traditional and conservative Islamic roots .
The perception and practice of religion , however , are not homogeneously distributed acrossTur- key .
In someregions , thedevoutbourgeoisiebecamean importantnewsocial class ( e.g. , in Anatolia ) ; in other regions , there are still many Islamic factions that stronglyopposeWestern-typemodernity.Theseculturaland ideological differences between localities affect how people react to forces of globaliza- tion and , hence , the extent to which hybrid school forms will emerge ( Mar- quis and Battilana 2009 ) .
Kern ( 2010 ) argues that adaptation to global prac- tices requires cultural resonance.Thenglobal institutions , values , andnorms9 For the principles of school foundings , we refer to http : //www.meb.gov.tr/duyurular /duyurular2010/mub/kurum_acilmasina_iliskin_esaslar.pdf .
1837 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allare regarded as persuasive ideas because they are compatible with existing ones or provide answers and solutions to individual problems and will be translated to fit locally available principles and practices ( Gamson 1992 ; Campbell 2004 ; Kern 2010 ) .
However , when globalization represents a threat to local traditions , itmay demarcate boundaries between the global and the local more sharply ( Mar- quis and Battilana 2009 , p. 284 ) .
Then westernization clashes with the local , triggering resistance and spurring ideological contestation and segregation .
In the present context , in districts where Islamic traditionalism has a strong foothold ( as witnessed by voting for the most religious parties ) ,10 resistance against globalization has traditionally been very high .
It can therefore be predicted that in these districts demand for hybrid education will be ex- tremely low even with strong globalization pressure .
When religious tradi- tionalism is low , in contrast , people will welcome hybrid solutions as a re- sponse to globalization .
This reasoning is consistent with research in other settings that show that ideological clashes have had a profound impact on the dynamics of several industries ( Boone andÖzcan 2014 ) .
For instance , anticorporate movements in theUnitedStates , whichdefend the community logic againstmass-market consolidation , have prevented the opening ofWal-Mart stores in some com- munities ( Ingram and Rao 2004 ; Rao , Yue , and Ingram 2011 ) .
In a similar vein , local cultural resistancehampered thegrowthofmass-market commer- cial banks in the United States in the 20th century ( Marquis and Lounsbury 2007 ; Marquis and Huang 2009 ) .
Apparently , communities seem to adopt dominant institutional templates onlywhencultural resistance is low.Taken together , we therefore expect that the proportion of votes on the most reli- gious parties will negatively moderate the impact of globalization on the emergence of Anatolian ImamHatip high schools .
HYPOTHESIS 2.—The positive impact of globalization on the district-level founding rate of hybrid high schools ( Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools ) decreases with the proportion of votes on the most religious parties in a local community.Local Templates Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools not only blend the curricula of Imam Hatip andAnatolian high schools into hybrid education but also blend their names literally as Anatolian ImamHatip high schools .
In districts in which both parent forms are firmly established , local people will not be unfamiliar with the recombination implied by the newly emerging hybrid form .
Ac-The “ most religious parties ” category does not refer to militant Islamist groups , but in-10stead to the legal political parties that voice a religious rhetoric .
1838 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeycording to institutional theory , the presence of both parent forms in a dis- trict should facilitate institutional recombination , and hence the emergence of hybrid high schools , for twomain reasons ( Oliver andMontgomery 2000 ; Minkoff 2002 ; Haveman and Rao 2006 ; Schneiberg and Clemens 2006 ; Schneiberg 2007 ) .
First , the presence of parent form high schools in a local district provides the necessary variation in organizational templates for hybrid organiza- tional forms to emerge ( Minkoff 2002 ; Haveman and Rao 2006 ) .
Organiza- tional variation is the rawmaterial for institutional recombination , which is the main feature of hybrid forms .
In a similar vein , established institutional paths represent the stock of resources and opportunities in local communi- ties for transformation and for the development of alternative organizational forms ( Schneiberg 2007 ) .
For instance , experience with different organiza- tional forms in local communities is a resource for institutional recombination or redeployment.Existing organizational forms constrain and enablemobili- zation and shape the capacity of neworganizational forms toproduce change ( Schneiberg and Lounsbury 2008 ) .
Second , as hybrid forms blend population boundaries , they face obstacles to build up legitimacy and obtain resources ( Minkoff 2002 ) .
However , newly emerging organizational forms tend to benefit from the legitimacy of estab- lished organizations if they fall into a cognitive category that is easily recog- nizable by the relevant audiences ( Dobrev , Özdemir , and Teo 2006 ) .
In this sense , the relationship between established and newly emerging organiza- tional forms , which are differentiated by some aspects in comparison to the established forms , as is the case for hybrid organizational forms , may bemu- tualistic ( Dobrev et al .
2006 ) .
Because of such legitimation spillovers , we therefore expect that the local hybrid school founding rate will increase with globalization especially when the local prevalence ( i.e. , density ) of both par- ent forms is high ( i.e. , ImamHatip high schools and Anatolian high schools ; Minkoff 1994 , 2002 ) , suggesting an interaction of local templates with glob- alization .
That is , the positive impact of globalization is amplified in a com- munity with higher densities of both parent forms .
HYPOTHESIS 3.—The positive impact of globalization on the district-level foundingrateofhybridhighschools ( AnatolianImamHatiphighschools ) in- creases with the density of both parent school forms ( Anatolian high schools and ImamHatip high schools ) in a local community.Local Incentives Organizations that conform to established categories are easier for audiences to recognize and to identify with , enhancing their legitimacy ( Hannan and Freeman 1989 ; Hannan , Pólos , andCarroll 2007 ) .
Because hybrid organiza- tions blur the boundaries of taken-for-granted organizational forms , bound-1839 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allary spanning generally meets sharp punishment as it has low appeal among audiences ( Rao , Monin , and Durand 2005 ; Hsu , Hannan , and Koçak 2009 ; Hannan 2010 ; Kovács andHannan 2010 ) .
Particularly , the punishment gets stronger if the category codes are oppositional or involve moral impera- tives ( KovácsandHannan2010 ) .Inthissense , buildinghybridorganizational forms andmarshaling their acceptance require strongmotivation of actors in order togain local commitment andmobilize thenecessary resources ( Benson 1977 ) .Weargue that two types of incentivesmay serve asmobilizingmotiva- tional forces : economic and ideological incentives ( Boone and Özcan 2014 ) .
First , local communities are more likely to adjust to globalization when economic incentives to do so are high .
Particularly , we claim that the degree of resonance between global and local norms , values , and practices will be highwhen the local community has a strong entrepreneurial culture , as wit- nessed by the growth in the number of entrepreneurs .
We predict that glob- alization will spur the adoption of alternative modernities—that unify Is- lamic traditions with features of Western modernism as reflected in hybrid schools—in entrepreneurial districts .
Beingpart of a globalworld ( economic ) system is instrumental for entrepreneurs as a precondition for the accumula- tion of capital and wealth .
Local entrepreneurs have to operate in a market- place that is modeled along the lines of practices spread through economic globalization .
They are therefore likely to bridge the gap between the local and global world of economic capitalism .
Bythenatureof theirrole , entrepreneursareeconomicallymotivated.They run a business that has to make a profit to be sustainable ( Kirzner 1997 ) .
As Shane and Venkataraman ( 2000 ) point out , opportunity recognition is a key attribute of entrepreneurship.Andafter an entrepreneur has observedanop- portunity for a profitable business , she or hewill seek to reap this opportunity ( Eckhardt and Shane 2003 ) .
In the context of globalization , we argue that lo- cal entrepreneurs spot business opportunities resulting from being linked to this global economic world and hence seek to promote the development of conditions and competencies required to capture these opportunities .
From this perspective , religious entrepreneurial communities can benefit greatly from Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools , which teach the knowledge and skills required for operating in the global business world—an illustrative ex- ample being proficiency in English , the world ’ s lingua franca .
HYPOTHESIS 4.—The positive impact of globalization on the district-level foundingrateofhybridhighschools ( AnatolianImamHatiphighschools ) in- creaseswith the growth of the number of entrepreneurs in a local community .
Second , ideological polarization is another mobilizing force ( Kurzman 1998 ; Hasenfeld and Gidron 2005 ; Boone and Özcan 2014 ) , because rivalry between dissimilar ideologies makes ideologies extremely sharp and salient , which mobilizes the adherents of these ideologies to diffuse their values and1840 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeypreferences ( Olzak andWest 1991 ; Barnett andWoywode 2004 ; Simons and Ingram 2004 ) .
This is consistent with Meyer and Staggenborg ’ s ( 1996 , p. 1638 ) proposition that “ when movements effectively create or exploit events , they are likely to encourage countermovement mobilization at the same time that they advance their own causes. ” The salience argument con- tends that ideological rivalry “ galvanizes ” the opposing groups and so spurs the formation of formal organizations that carry these ideological values ( Olzak and West , 1991 , p. 459 ) .
Such organization building mobilizes even more collective action ( Tilly 1978 ) such that the establishment of one organi- zational formwill reinforce the dynamics of the rival one ( Boone et al .
2011 ) .
As carriers of ideologies , schools are affected by the distribution of differ- ent ideologies in society .
Each subgroup representing these ideologies de- mands a specific form of schooling that fits with its ideology .
In addition , schools have strategic importance for decision makers , since education is a state instrument to influence the relationship of the individual to the state or polity ( Nielsen and Hannan 1977 ) .
So the demand for and supply of specific types of schooling are driven by the prevailing ideologies in society and pri- vate actors trying to influence political elites via social movements in order to obtain schooling that fits with their ideology ( Meyer and Staggenborg 1996 ; Güven 2005 ) .
In Turkey , the century-long ideological/religious polarization mobilized the participants of each faction to create structural arrangements against each other in order to compete ( Benson 1977 ) .
The number of Imam Hatip high schools increased particularly in the 1950s in Turkey because of the in- creasing influence of political Islam .
At the same time , this triggered action from secular countermovements with a strong demand for educational ex- pansion of the secular/cosmopolitan high school type ( Heper and Güney 2000 ; Güven 2005 ) .
Therefore , both forms stimulated each other ’ s growth rate as a result of a sequence of movements and countermovements ( Boone et al .
2011 ) .
With the emergence of a devout bourgeois class , cosmopolitan education gained strategic importance for the religious population as well .
In order to be connectedwith the rest of theworld and to be a part of the elite as a global actor ( Meyer 2000 ) , religious education had to compete on similar grounds with the secular/cosmopolitan high schools by establishing hybrid school forms .
So , with the increasing impact of globalization , the nature of compe- tition between secular and religious factions gained a new dimension : the need toadapt toglobalnorms , values , andpractices .
Ideological/religiouspo- larization acts as a mobilizing force for the religious faction to reach out for an alternative structural arrangement—that is , the establishment of hybrid high schools—to be able to compete with the secular faction for elite func- tions ( Hasenfeld and Gidron 2005 ) .
Therefore , we expect that the motiva-1841 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Alltion of the religious faction to blend religious and cosmopolitan identities as a response to globalization will be more pronounced when local polariza- tion/ideological contention in the district is high .
HYPOTHESIS 5.—The positive impact of globalization on the district-level founding rate of hybrid high schools ( Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools ) increases with religious-secular polarization in a local community.DATA AND METHODS Data The data set covers the period from 1985 to 2007 for 81 districts in Turkey .
We counted the annual number of Anatolian , Imam Hatip , and Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools in Turkey at the district level .
We start our anal- ysis with the foundation of the first Anatolian Imam Hatip school in 1985 and end our analysis in 2007 because a new regulation in 2008 transformed all regular high schools into Anatolian high schools.11 The data for Imam Hatip high schools andAnatolian high schools were obtained fromNational Education Statistics , as published by the Prime Ministry State Institute of Statistics .
The data for Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools were collected through the high school directory and the websites of each Anatolian Imam Hatip high school.Dependent Variable Following the organizational ecology literature , our dependent variable is the annual founding rate of Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools at the dis- trict level ( yearly number of new entries into the local district-level popula- tion ) .
Note that , given that we do not observe any exit or mortality of hybrid Anatolian Imam Hatip high schools , our yearly founding count is in fact a first-difference variable of hybrid high school density at time tminus this density at time t 2 1.Independent Variables Depending on the specific definition of globalization , the literature empha- sizes different ways to measure globalization and its different dimensions .
Some emphasize the economic angle ( Harvey 1989 ; Sassen 1991 ) , others fo- cus on the political dimension ( McGrew 1997 ; Held 1998 ) , and yet others claim that the economic and political perspectives ignore the cultural as-The curriculum of regular schools has changed , and the weight of foreign language11courses has increased .
1842 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeypects of globalization ( Ritzer 1993 ) .
Guillén ( 2001 ) provides a detailed anal- ysis of different perspectives regarding globalization and its indicators .
He classifies these indicators into economic , financial , social/political , and bib- liographical measures , and he argues that globalization should best be re- garded as a multifaceted concept that can not be captured by a single vari- able .
Therefore , in the current study , we decided to employ the KOF index of globalization , which explicitly accounts for the multidimensional nature of globalization .
The KOF index represents an attempt to develop a broad measure of the extent of globalization of a country .
This index has been accepted in re- cent empirical literature as a valid measure and was first presented in 2002 , covering 123 countries and including 23 variables ( Dreher 2006 ) .
The index includes economic , political , and social dimensions of globalization .
Each of these three dimensions is further divided into subdimensions .
Economic globalization of a country is described by actual economic flows ( trade , for- eign direct investment , portfolio investment , and income payments to for- eign nationals , eachmeasuredas apercentage ofGDP ) and the absence of re- strictions ( hidden import barriers , mean tariff rate , taxes on international trade , and capital account restrictions ) .
Political globalization is measured with the number of foreign embassies , memberships of international orga- nizations , and participation in the UN Security Council missions .
Social globalization covers items such as international tourism , number of inter- net hosts and users , as well as the number of McDonald ’ s restaurants and IKEA shops ( per capita ) .
The annually updated KOF index measures glob- alization on a scale from 1 to 100 , with higher numbers indicating more globalization .
The data were obtained from the website of the Swiss Eco- nomic Institute .
A number of studies employ the KOF index of globalization .
Bergh and Nilsson ( 2010 ) examine the relationship between the KOF index of global- ization and income inequality by using panel data covering about 80 coun- tries for theperiod1970–2005.Chang , Lee , andHsieh ( 2011 ) analyzethe long- run relationship between real output and the KOF index of globalization by employing annual data of Group of 7 countries from 1970 to 2006 .
Potrafke ( 2010 ) investigates the influence of globalization on a variety of aspects of la- bormarket deregulation by taking theKOF index as a proxy of globalization for 20OECDcountries in the 1982–2003period.Usingpanel dataof 39 coun- tries over the period 1979–2007 , Chang and Lee ( 2012 ) estimate the impact of the KOF index of globalization on the development and convergence of international life insurance markets .
The aim of Pekarskiene and Susniene ( 2011 ) is to assess the ( changes in the ) level of globalization in theBaltic coun- tries using the KOF globalization index .
Asa furthervalidity check , wecollecteddata regarding thenumberofnon- profit international organizations that have headquarters in Turkey , which1843 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allis a well-known alternative measure of globalization ( Guillén 2001 ) .
These organizations can be classified as nongovernmental organizations , intergov- ernmental organizations , and international nongovernmental organizations .
All these organizational actors play their role in global politics and are con- sidered as an important indicator of globalization .
The increase in the num- ber of international organizations constitutes an institution-building pro- cess , reflecting the relative power of international and global political actors ( Chase-Dunn 1999 ) .
Hence , the number of international organizations in a country is an indicator of this country ’ s degree of integration into the global world .
We collected these data from the online database of The Yearbook of International Organizations , which is published by the Union of Interna- tional Associations.12 The correlations between this alternative globalization measure , on the one hand , and the overall KOF globalization index and its subdimensions ( economic , political , and social ) , on the other hand , are very high : .98 , .96 , .94 , and .91 , respectively .
As a second robustness check , we compare Turkish economic growth ( in GDP per capita ) with globalization ( through the KOF index and its three dimensions ) over time .
Recall that figure 1 reveals a strong increase in all KOF globalization indices until 1994 , after which growth seem to taper off .
Figure 4 provides Turkish GDP per capita , indicating a different pattern : GDP per capita is increasing for the whole observation period and even ac- celerates after 2000 .
This suggests that economic growth follows the global- ization trend and that economic development and globalization ( as mea- sured by the KOF index ) are different measures .
We employ variables at the local level in order to analyze the character- istics that moderate the impact of globalization .
To explore hypothesis 2 , we include the interaction of the KOF globalization index and the percentage of votes that the most religious parties received at the district level in par- liamentary elections ( variable label traditional Islamic votes ) , with which we capture ideological movements that oppose globalization.13 The political parties are classified on a secular/religious scale , ranging from 1 ( the most secular ) to 10 ( the most religious ) .
This scaling was done by the first author ( of Turkish nationality ) and was cross-checked by Turkish political scien- tists ( table A1 in the appendix lists all parties that ever participated in elec- tions during our study period and the secular/religious score attached to each party ) .1412 Note that this variable does not cover as much information as the KOF globalization index .
13 The election outcomes at time t were used to fill in the subsequent years without par- liamentary elections .
Ourmeasurewas updated each time an election occurred .
The same procedure was used for the ideological polarization variable described below .
14 The most religious parties are the ones that score 10 on the secular/religious scale .
1844 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in TurkeyTo test hypothesis 3 , we include the interaction terms of the density of Imam Hatip and Anatolian high schools with the globalization index , as Imam Hatip and Anatolian high schools are the parent forms of the hybrid Anatolian ImamHatip high schools .
That is , as both parent forms are com- bined in the hybrid high school form , we add a three-way interaction of both parent form densitieswith the globalization index ( next to all two-way prod- uct terms ) .
The independent variable key to hypothesis 4 is the interaction of theKOF globalization index and the growth of the number of employers at the district level , which is our proxy for the proglobalization economic incentives as- sociatedwith a district ’ s entrepreneurial community.We include the growth of the number of employers at the district level as our measure of local eco- nomic incentives .
This variable is obtained from the National Education Statistics , as published annually by the PrimeMinistry State Institute of Sta- tistics .
Regarding hypothesis 5 , we add the interaction of the KOF globalization index and a polarization measure .
We use the polarization index proposed by Esteban and Ray ( 1994 ) in order to measure the secular-religious polar- ization of local communities at the district level ( variable label ideological polarization ) .
This polarization index is based on the Gini coefficient that takes into account both the size of the subgroups and the distance between the polarized groups:15FIG .
4.—GDP per capita in Turkey ( in U.S. dollars ) , 1985–200715 The measurement of the distance between groups depends on the context .
In our case , the distance between the polarized groups refers to the distance in terms of secular- religious orientation of the community at the district level .
1845 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology AllP 5 ko N i51 o N j51 p11ai pjjyi 2 yjj , in which k is the scaling factor , p denotes the size of the groups , jyi 2 yjj gives the distance between groups i and j , and a parameterizes the degree of polarization sensitivity that takes a value between zero and 1.6 ( Esteban and Ray 1994 ) .
This measure captures the intuition that polarization is high when there is a large distance between a small number of groups of signif- icant size.Wemeasure the size of the groups by using the proportional num- ber of votes that political parties received in parliamentary elections at the district level .
The distance between the polarized groups is measured by means of the classification of political parties ranging from 1 ( most secular ) to 10 ( most religious ) , mentioned above .
We set k5 1 and a5 0.8.16 Hence , we follow most researchers by giving a balanced weight to the size of and thedistancebetween the subgroups.Weranrobustnessanalyseswitha50.4 and a5 1.2 , which produced a pattern of findings similar to what we report below ( available on request ) .Control Variables We control for carrying capacity by including the percentage of government expenditures devoted to education at the country level , as well as national GDP growth and the logarithm of the population size at the district level.17 We added a dummy variable to control for the years following a territorial change of a few districts ( one for the years after the change and zero other- wise ) .
For the different official regions in Turkey ( i.e. , the Aegean , Black Sea , Central Anatolian , Eastern Anatolian , Marmara , Mediterranean , and Southeastern Anatolian regions ) , we introduce dummies that take a value of one if the district is in that region and zero otherwise .
At the district level , we control for the density of previously founded hybrid high schools and the densities of the parent high schools forms ( Anatolian and ImamHatip high schools ) .
Finally , regular high school density is added to control for the gen- eral expansion of the high school system in Turkey .
We take the one-year lagged values of all variables ( except for the dummy variables and the two variables based on election outcomes , i.e. , traditional Islamic votes and ideo- logical polarization , as the latter two are constant between election periodsSince k is a multiplicative constant , it does not have any qualitative effect on the results steban and Ray 1994 ) .
In further robustness analyses , to be discussed below , we added real GDP per capita as control variable ( available on request ) .16 ( E 17 a 1846 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeyso that an additional one-year lag is not informative ) in order to avoid si- multaneity.Model Specification The dependent variable is a count of the yearly number of newly established hybrid schools in the district .
The distribution of count variables is typically highly skewed to the right with many observations that are zero or close to zero , all values being nonnegative .
As it is preferable to usemethods that are consistent with the underlying process that generates the founding events observed as nonnegative aggregate counts , it is recommended in the litera- ture to use Poisson regression to analyze founding rates ( Hannan and Free- man1987,1989 ; BarronandHannan1991 ; Carroll andHannan2000 ) .How- ever , in the case of overdispersion ( i.e. , the variance of the count is larger than the expectedmean ) , Poisson regression underestimates the coefficients ’ standard errors , leading to inflation of significance levels ( McCullagh and Nelder 1989 ; Wezel 2005 ) .
Then , negative binominal regression should be applied , which adds a stochastic error component , following a gamma dis- tribution , to the model ( Barron and Hannan 1991 ; Cattani , Pennings , and Wezel 2003 ) .
Thismethod has become the standard in organizational sociol- ogy toanalyzeaggregate foundingdataof thekindwecollected inourproject ( see Carroll and Hannan 2000 ) .
Following Baron , Hannan , and Burton ( 2001 ) , we use Liang and Zeger ’ s ( 1986 ) method of generalized estimating equations ( GEE ) , which generalizes quasi likelihood estimation to the panel data context .
GEE is a very flexible approach that allows one to control for many different forms of correlated error terms , including serial autocorrelation , by using an empirical variance estimator ( Barron and Hannan 1991 ; Baron et al .
2001 ; Ballinger 2004 ) .
As recommended byBarron andHannan ( 1991 ) in the context of the analysis of longitudinal founding rates , we assume a first-order autocorrelation struc- ture to control for ( potentially remaining ) serial autocorrelation among error terms .
GEE also allows us to account for the likelihood of nonconstant var- iance for different values of the dependent variable due to clustering of ob- servations within the district by using theHuber-White Sandwich estimator to estimate the standard errors ( i.e. , robust standard errors for clustering of observations in the district ) .
Allmodels are estimated using theXTGEErou- tine of version 10.0 of Stata .
A few other estimation-related issues are worth mentioning .
First , we checked for nonstationarity of our dependent variable , as this might lead to spurious relationships .
Figure 5 plots the number of foundings of hybrid high schools over time .
Visual inspection suggests that this time series is not trended and , thus , stationary .
Given that there are no exit events in1847 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allthe period under study , the founding count is , in fact , a first-difference var- iable of hybrid school density at time tminus t2 1 .
It is well established that even nonstationary series generally become stationary after taking the first difference .
A Fisher type unit root test for unbalanced panel data formally reveals that we can reject the null hypothesis that all district-level time se- ries are nonstationary against the alternative hypothesis that at least one se- ries in our panel is stationary.18 We continued with Dickey-Fuller unit root tests for each district separately .
Our results indicate that the series of al- most all districts ( except for two ) are stationary as the null hypothesis of a unit root has to be rejected.19 Taking all this together , we conclude that nonstationarity of our major dependent variable does not represent a seri- ous threat to the statistical inferences made in the article .
Second , we ran conditional fixed-effects negative binomial regressions ( availableonrequest ) .Ofcourse , bydoingso , wefilterout thebetween-district variation that is essential from the perspective of our theoretical logic , which stresses the importance of geographical heterogeneity in explaining whether and how local communities adjust to globalization .
An additional drawback of fixed effects in this setting is that we lose the observations of the few dis- tricts that never experienced a founding event ( i.e. , 58 district-year obser- vations ) .
However , notwithstanding this removal of theoretically relevant cross-district heterogeneity , which comes with drops in significance levels , Note that we have 81 panels ( districts ) .
For 67 panels , we have data points for the hole period under study ( 23 observations ) ; for the remaining 14 districts , we have be- een nine and 19 observations because these 14 districts were established only after 985 ( i.e. , in the 1980s , 1990s , and 2000s ) .
So our panel is unbalanced .
Note that most of the standard unit root tests ( such as Dickey-Fuller ) have low power .
o in small samples per district , one may easily end upwith type II errors of accepting the ull hypothesis of a unit root while it is actually false ( see Hamilton 1994 ) .18 w tw 1 19 S n FIG .
5.—Foundings of hybrid schools at the level of Turkey , 1985–20071848 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeythe estimates are highly sign consistent , which offers further support for the robustness of our findings.FINDINGS Descriptive statistics and bivariate correlations are reported in table 1 .
Ta- ble 2 provides ourGEEnegative binomial regression estimates of the found- ing rate of hybrid high schools at the district level .
We first focus on the effects of globalization and the control variables .
Model 1 reveals that the main effect of globalization is significantly positive ( B5 .10 ; P < .001 ) , providing support for hypothesis 1 predicting that glob- alization spurs the founding rate of hybrid high schools .
In addition , na- tional GDP growth and percentage of educational expenditures have a pos- itive impact on hybrid high school founding .
Moreover , Marmara being the omitted region , we observe that the hybrid high school founding rate is lower in eastern , southeastern , and central Anatolian regions .
At the district level , district population and the most religious votes have a positive effect , whereas secular-religious polarization has a negative impact on the emer- gence of hybrid high schools.20 Density of regular high schools does not have any significant effect .
The model 1 estimates further suggest that the densi- ties of Imam Hatip and Anatolian high schools both have a positive influ- ence on the emergence of hybrid high schools ( B5 .14 and B5 .06 , respec- tively ; for both estimates , P < .001 ) , suggesting positive spillover effects of the parent templates .
A perhaps counterintuitive finding is the significantly negative sign of lagged hybrid school density .
After all , the increase in the number of hybrid high schools in a district could have a legitimation effect , predicting a pos- itive sign .
What may explain our negative coefficient is a carrying capacity effect .
That is , in a district with a certain population size , there is a natural limit to thedemandforacertainhighschool type , whichputsanupperbound- ary to the number of high schools of that type that can be viably established in a district .
To check for this interpretation , we ran the models without the densities of other high school types : the results reported in the article do not change ( including the sign of the lagged density of hybrid high schools ; the results are available on request ) .
In addition , we ran the same models by20 The finding that the traditional Islamic votes and ideological polarization have a pos- itive and negative main effect , respectively , on the founding rate of hybrid schools might seem surprising at first glance .
However , note that in subsequent models we show that these variables significantly interact with globalization , making the interpretation of main effects not verymeaningful .
On amore substantive level , the overall pattern of find- ings reported below suggests that the impact of globalization on hybrid school foundings is very strong even in communities that might resist and that the local context mainly at- tenuates the overwhelming force of globalization .
1849 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
All This cont use subject to UniverT A B L E 1 D es cr ip ti ve s an d C o rr el at io n s o f M aj o r V ar ia bl es u n d er St u d y M ea n S D M in M ax 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 .
H yb ri d sc h oo ls fo u n d in gs .. .. .. .. .. .
.1 2 .4 2 0 7 .. .
2 .
E d u ca ti on al ex p en d it u re ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. 10 .5 8 2 .
19 7 .
23 14 .6 2 .1 6* 3 .
G D P gr ow th ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
4 .
43 4 .
86 2 7 .
50 9 .
49 .0 8* 2 .0 2 4 .
L n ( d is tr ic t p op u la ti on ) ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .
13 .1 9 .8 2 10 .1 3 16 .3 2 .1 9* 2 .0 1 2 .0 03 5 .
K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. 57 .3 2 7 .
75 41 .4 2 69 .1 6 .0 8* .0 2 2 .0 8* 2 .0 3 6 .
T ra d it io n al Is la m ic v ot es .. .. .. .. .. .
11 .2 5 10 .4 2 0 51 .6 .0 1 .0 5* 2 .0 1 2 .0 1 2 .0 4 7 .
D en si ty h yb ri d sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .
.9 6 1 .
41 0 16 .1 2* .0 05 .0 2 .4 3* .4 7* 2 .0 7* 8 .
D en si ty Im am H at ip sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .
5 .
45 3 .
90 0 23 .2 1* 2 .0 3 .0 04 .7 3* .0 2 .0 2 .5 6* 9 .
D en si ty A n at ol ia n sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .
4 .
11 5 .
58 0 77 .2 5* .0 6* 2 .0 01 .6 6* .3 3* 2 .1 0* .7 5* .6 3* 10 .E m p lo ye r n u m b er gr ow th ( t 2 1 ) .. .. 7 .
82 5 .
25 2 11 .1 1 52 .5 .0 1 .2 6* 2 .0 6* .0 8* 2 .2 3* .2 8* 2 .1 8* 2 .0 1 2 .1 3* .. .
11 .I d eo lo gi ca lp ol ar iz at io n .. .. .. .. .. .
.8 0 .1 8 .2 6 1 .
38 2 .0 2 .1 2* .0 5* .1 3* 2 .4 6* .1 2* 2 .3 0* 2 .1 4* 2 .1 2* .2 7* N O T E .— n 5 1 , 50 7 .
* P < .0 5 ( t w o- ta ile d ) .e s nt itydo ofwnlo Chiaded cago fr Prom ess 12 T8 .
erm250 s .1 and44 .
C14 on4 o ditin A onugu s ( httst 0 p : /7 , 2019 07:16:04 AM /www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeyreplacing the dependent variable ( founding rate of hybrid high schools ) with the founding rate of Imam Hatip high schools and Anatolian high schools , onebyone , with andwithout thedensity of the other high school types ( avail- able on request ) .
We found negative ( and significant ) coefficients for the lagged densities of ImamHatip and Anatolian high schools , respectively , in all these supplementary analyses .
These findings offer further support for our carrying capacity explanation of the negative sign of the coefficient of the lagged density of hybrid high schools .
In model 2 , we see that the proportion of the most religious votes ( tradi- tional Islamic votes ) attenuates the impact of globalization on the hybrid high school founding rate ( B52.002 ; P < .05 ) .21 Strong support for a tradi- tional interpretation of Islam apparently hampers the local community from adapting to global norms because of a lack of resonance between the global and the local , a finding that is in line with hypothesis 2 .
In model 3 , we report the three-way interaction of the KOF globalization index and the densities of ImamHatip andAnatolian high schools to test for hypothesis 3 ’ s prediction that the joint presence of both parent forms mod- erates the impact of globalization by providing the institutional repertoire for hybrid high school formation .
The two-way interactions of both densi- ties with globalization separately are negative , but the three-way interac- tion is significantly positive as expected ( B5 .003 ; P < .01 ) .
This pattern of findings underscores that the positive impact of globalization on hybrid high school foundings increases when both types of parent high schools are prev- alent in the district .
In model 4 , we find support for hypothesis 4 .
The effect of globalization on hybrid high school formation increases with the growth in the number of employers in a local district ( B5 .01 ; P < .05 ) .
This finding suggests that a strong entrepreneurial climate in a district provides the economic incen- tives to adapt to global norms , values , and practices by blending the local with the global .
Finally , the estimates of model 5 offer evidence for hypoth- esis 5 , showing a significantly positive interaction coefficient between the KOF globalization index and ideological polarization ( B 5 .21 ; P < .001 ) .
Secular-religious polarization acts as a mobilizing force for rival ideologies , triggering the ideological incentives for local adaptation when globalization increases .
To further explore our argument , we performed a post hoc analysis by estimating model 6 , which includes the interaction between religious votes ( hypothesis 2 ) , on the one hand , and the growth of the number of employers21 Note that , for the traditional Islamic votes variable , we included only the political par- ties that receive a score of 10 on the religiosity scale .
As a robustness check , we also added the political parties that score 8 and 9 on this scale .
The results remain the same ( available on request ) .
1851 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
All use sT A B L E 2 N eg at iv e B in o m ia l G E E R eg re ss io n E st im at es o f th e Fo u n d in g R at e o f H yb ri d Sc h o o ls ,1 98 5– 20 07 M od el 1 M od el 2 M od el 3 M od el 4 M od el 5 M od el 6 C on st an t .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 17 .2 9* ** 2 18 .9 0* ** 2 22 .8 9* ** 2 14 .8 2* ** 2 5 .
19 2 17 .3 4* ** ( 1 .8 4 ) ( 1 .6 4 ) ( 4 .1 3 ) ( 3 .1 1 ) ( 3 .2 8 ) ( 1 .9 9 ) E d u ca ti on al ex p en d it u re ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .3 5* ** .3 3* ** .3 7* ** .3 6* ** .3 5* ** .3 2* ** ( .0 3 ) ( .0 3 ) ( .0 5 ) ( .0 4 ) ( .0 3 ) ( .0 3 ) G D P gr ow th ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
.1 1* ** .1 1* ** .0 8* ** .1 2* ** .1 0* ** .1 2* ** ( .0 2 ) ( .0 2 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 2 ) ( .0 2 ) ( .0 3 ) L n ( d is tr ic t p op u la ti on ) ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
.3 2* .3 0* * .2 2 .3 7* * .2 3* .3 7* ( .1 4 ) ( .1 0 ) ( .1 5 ) ( .1 4 ) ( .0 9 ) ( .1 7 ) D is tr ic t te rr it or y ch an ge .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .4 0* ** .3 1* ** .2 0 .4 3* ** 2 .0 9 .3 3* * ( .0 9 ) ( .0 9 ) ( .1 3 ) ( .1 0 ) ( .1 2 ) ( .1 0 ) M ed it er ra n ea n re gi on .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .0 9 2 .1 2 2 .4 9* * 2 .3 7* 2 .1 1 2 .2 0 ( .1 3 ) ( .1 2 ) ( .1 8 ) ( .1 6 ) ( .1 4 ) ( .1 3 ) E as te rn A n at ol ia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .4 6* 2 .5 0* * 2 .5 6* * 2 .5 1* 2 .4 9* 2 .6 2* * ( .2 1 ) ( .2 0 ) ( .2 1 ) ( .2 2 ) ( .2 2 ) ( .2 1 ) A eg ea n re gi on .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .1 4 .1 2 2 .2 4 2 .0 4 .1 0 .1 3 ( .1 2 ) ( .1 3 ) ( .1 6 ) ( .1 2 ) ( .1 3 ) ( .1 2 ) S ou th ea st A n at ol ia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .7 7* ** 2 .8 0* ** 2 .8 6* * 2 .8 5* ** 2 .6 5* * 2 .9 2* ** ( .2 3 ) ( .2 1 ) ( .2 6 ) ( .2 5 ) ( .2 5 ) ( .2 2 ) C en tr al A n at ol ia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 1 .
20 ** * 2 1 .
11 ** * 2 1 .
41 ** * 2 1 .
00 ** * 2 .6 8* ** 2 1 .
35 ** * ( .1 6 ) ( .1 2 ) ( .1 4 ) ( .1 0 ) ( .1 1 ) ( .1 6 ) B la ck S ea re gi on .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .1 0 2 .0 7 2 .1 9 2 .0 02 2 .1 4 2 .1 8 ( .1 3 ) ( .1 1 ) ( .1 4 ) ( .1 2 ) ( .1 6 ) ( .1 3 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .1 0* ** .1 2* ** .2 1* * .0 4 2 .0 8 .1 0* ** ( .0 1 ) ( .0 2 ) ( .0 7 ) ( .0 3 ) ( .0 5 ) ( .0 1 ) T ra d it io n al Is la m ic v ot es .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
.0 3* ** .1 4* * .0 4* ** .0 2* * .0 2* ** 2 .0 05 ( .0 1 ) ( .0 5 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 1 ) D en si ty h yb ri d sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
2 .4 6* ** 2 .4 2* ** 2 .5 8 2 .4 1* ** 2 .4 0* ** 2 .4 8* ** ( .0 5 ) ( .0 4 ) ( .0 4 ) ( .0 4 ) ( .0 5 ) ( .0 6 ) ubject Thi to Us con niveten rsit d ty ow of nl Choad icaed go fro Prem ss 12 Te18 8.2 rm52 50 s a.14 nd4.1 Co44 nd on itio A nsug ( hust ttp 07 : //w , 2 w 01 w.j9 0 ou7:1 rna6 : ls.04 uchAM icago.edu/t-and-c ) .
D en si ty Im am H at ip sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
.1 4* ** .1 4* ** .6 9* * .1 3* ** .1 2* ** .1 5* ** ( .0 1 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .4 5 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 2 ) D en si ty A n at ol ia n sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
.0 6* ** .0 6* ** 1 .
91 ** * .0 4* ** .0 5* ** .0 5* ** ( .0 1 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .5 5 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 1 ) D en si ty re gu la r sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
2 .0 02 2 .0 02 .0 1 .0 03 .0 02 2 .0 03 ( .0 03 ) ( .0 03 ) ( .0 04 ) ( .0 03 ) ( .0 04 ) ( .0 03 ) E m p lo ye r n u m b er gr ow th ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .0 1 .0 2 2 .0 1 2 .4 3* .0 2 2 .0 8* ** ( .0 1 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .2 2 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 2 ) Id eo lo gi ca lp ol ar iz at io n .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .8 8* * 2 .3 2 2 .5 7 2 1 .
48 ** * 2 13 .7 5* ** 2 .2 9 ( .3 0 ) ( .3 7 ) ( .6 3 ) ( .4 3 ) ( 4 .1 5 ) ( .3 4 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) tr ad it io n al Is la m ic v ot es .. .. .. .. .. .. .
2 .0 02 * ( .0 01 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) d en si ty Im am H at ip sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. 2 .0 1 ( .0 1 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) d en si ty A n at ol ia n sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .
2 .0 3* ** ( .0 1 ) D en si ty Im am H at ip sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) d en si ty A n at ol ia n sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .
2 .1 6* * ( .0 5 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) d en si ty Im am H at ip sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) d en si ty A n at ol ia n sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
.0 03 ** ( .0 01 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) em p lo ye r n u m b er gr ow th ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .
.0 1* ( .0 04 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) id eo lo gi ca l p ol ar iz at io n .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .2 1* ** ( .0 6 ) T ra d it io n al Is la m ic v ot es em p lo ye r n u m b er gr ow th ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .. .. .. .0 04 ** * ( .0 01 ) W al d v 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
1 , 34 5 .
51 ** * 1 , 47 2 .
29 ** * 1 , 22 2 .
29 ** * 1 , 22 8 .
71 ** * 1 , 78 6 .
88 ** * 1 , 29 8 .
62 ** * N O T E .— n 5 1 , 50 7 .
N u m b er s in p ar en th es es ar e ro b u st S E s. * P < .0 5 , tw o- ta ile d .
** P < .0 1 .
** * P < .0 01 .
All use subject Th to is c Unon iveten rsit d ty ow of nl Choad icaed go fro Pre1 m ss8 12 Te53 8.2 rm50 s a.14 nd4.1 Co44 nd on itio A nsug ( hust ttp 07 : //w , w 201 w 9 0 .jou7 : rn16:04 AM als.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology All ( hypothesis 4 ) , on the other .
The significantly positive estimate supports the underlying argument that a larger Islamic faction promotes alternative mo- dernities ( Robertson and Khonder 1998 ) , particularly in a community that features a strong local entrepreneurial culture ( B 5 .004 ; P < .001 ) .Robustness Analyses In our main analyses reported in this article , we decided against including ( lagged ) GDP per capita because of the high correlation of this control var- iablewith our ( lagged ) KOFglobalization index ( .87 ) , which causes potential problems due tomulticollinearity .
It iswell known that this inflates standard errors of estimates , reducing t-statistics and significance levels .
However , to disentangle the effect of these variables , we comparedmodelswithbothvari- ablesenteredseparatelyandsimultaneously ( resultsareavailableonrequest ) .
BothGDP per capita and the KOF globalization index are significantly pos- itively related to the founding rate of hybrid high schools when entered sep- arately in the regression equation .
However , when entered simultaneously , the estimate of GDP per capita becomes insignificant , even with a negative sign , whereas the effect of the KOF index is not affected compared to the es- timate reported in model 1 of table 2 ( i.e. , B 5 .11 ; P < .001 ) .
This compar- ative analysis suggests that the emergence of hybrid high schools is indeed drivenby globalization , andnot by the steadygrowth ofGDPper capita dur- ing our observationwindow , notwithstanding the fact that both are strongly relatedbecause globalizationhashadahuge impact on subsequent economic growth in Turkey ( see also the comparison between both time series in figs .
1 and 4 discussed above ) .22 Second , we ran an analysis with the number of nonprofit international or- ganizations ( IOs ) that have headquarters in Turkey as an alternative mea- sure of globalization , replacing the ( lagged ) KOF globalization index with the ( lagged ) number of IOs headquartered in Turkey ( results are available on request ) .
All findings turn out to be very robust , which is hardly surpris- ing given the high correlation between the alternative IO measure and the KOF globalization index ( see above ) .
This additional analysis provides fur- ther support for both the validity of the KOF globalization index and the robustness of our results .
Third and finally , we ran separate analyses for the economic , political , and social dimensions of the KOF globalization index .
The results are sum-22 To be on the safe side , we also reestimated all interaction effects with the KOF glob- alization index now including GDP per capita as a control variable .
This does not qual- itatively change the findings reported in table 2 .
Only the significance level of the inter- action effect of KOF globalization index employer number growth slightly drops to the 10 % level ( results available on request ) .
1854 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeymarized in table 3 ( full results are available on request ) , reporting only the relevant estimates regarding KOF ’ s three dimensions .
For the economic globalization index , we find support for all hypotheses except hypothesis 4 ; for the political globalization index , we observe only evidence in favor of hypotheses 1 and 3 ; and for the social globalization in- dex , all hypotheses are supported .
Note , however , that the signs of all inter- action estimates are the same .
We further discuss this set of additional find- ings in the concluding section.DISCUSSION In this article , we analyze the impact of globalization on the emergence of hybrid organizational forms , finding support for a positive main effect .
We propose that the impact of globalization depends on three local characteris- tics : the potentialmisfit between global and local ideas , values , andpractices ( local resistance ) ; the presence of institutional repertoire to blend into hybrid organizational forms ( local templates ) ; and the motivation of the local com- munity to adapt to global ideas , values , and practices ( local incentives ) .
We test our hypotheses in the setting of Islamic education in Turkey between 1985 and 2007 .
In this period , Turkey experienced a growing impact of glob- alization in combination with the rise of an Islamic movement , with large variation across the country .
This setting is highly appropriate for our pur- poses , with clear forces of globalization and localization operating next to one another .
Regarding the effect of local resistance , our evidence suggests that in the most religious , traditional local communities , the impact of globalization on hybrid high school formation is attenuated .
The more local people vote on themost religiousparties , the less likely localhighschoolsareestablished that blend cosmopolitan and religious norms , values , and practices into a hybrid form in response to increasing globalization .
Then globalization presents a threat to local traditions , aswesternization clasheswith the local , which trig- gers strong resistance among the large traditionalist fraction of the commu- nity against the globalmodel of education .
This in turn hampers thewilling- ness of the local community to recombine global and traditional educational templates into a hybrid school form .
Such communities are less susceptible to adapting to global boundary-blurring forces , which often demarcates tra- ditional boundaries between the global and the local more sharply ( Marquis and Batillana 2009 ) .
As far as the role of local templates is concerned , we find that the found- ing rate of the hybrid high school form increases with the number of parent high school forms , namely , Anatolian and Imam Hatip high schools .
As a consequence of the experience of the local community with different organi- zational parent forms and the legitimacy that spills over from these parent1855 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
T A B L E 3 N eg at iv e B in o m ia l G E E R eg re ss io n E st im at es o f th e Fo u n d in g R at e o f H yb ri d Sc h o o ls ,1 98 5– 20 07 : K O F E co n o m ic , P o li ti ca l , an d So ci al G lo ba li za ti o n In d ex E co n om ic K O F In d ex P ol it ic al K O F In d ex S oc ia l K O F In d ex E co n om ic K O F In d ex P ol it ic al K O F In d ex S oc ia l K O F In d ex E co n om ic K O F In d ex P ol it ic al K O F In d ex S oc ia l K O F In d ex E co n om ic K O F In d ex P ol it ic al K O F In d ex S oc ia l K O F In d ex K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .1 6* ** .1 5* ** .0 6* ** .1 3* ** .1 7* ** .1 1* ** .0 9 .1 3* ** 2 .0 1 00 4 .0 6 2 .1 2* ** ( .0 3 ) ( .0 3 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 3 ) ( .0 5 ) ( .0 2 ) ( .0 5 ) ( .0 4 ) ( .0 3 ) ( .0 6 ) ( .0 9 ) ( .0 3 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) tr a- d it io n al Is la m ic v ot es .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .0 03 * 2 .0 02 2 .0 03 ** * ( .0 01 ) ( .0 01 ) ( .0 01 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) d en - si ty Im am H at ip sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. 2 .0 01 2 .0 1 2 .0 01 ( .0 03 ) ( .0 05 ) ( .0 02 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) d en - si ty A n at ol ia n sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .0 01 2 .0 1 2 .0 2* ** ( .0 04 ) ( .0 1 ) ( .0 04 ) D en si ty Im am H at ip sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) d en si ty A n at ol ia n sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .
2 .0 7* ** 2 .1 5* 2 .0 3* ** ( .0 2 ) ( .0 7 ) ( .0 1 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) d en - si ty Im am H at ip sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) d en si ty A n at ol ia n sc h oo ls ( t 2 1 ) .. .
.0 01 ** * .0 02 * .0 01 ** * ( .0 00 3 ) ( .0 01 ) ( .0 00 1 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) em - p lo ye r n u m b er gr ow th ( t 2 1 ) .. .. .. .0 05 .0 03 .0 1* ( .0 05 ) ( .0 03 ) ( .0 1 ) K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex ( t 2 1 ) id eo lo gi ca l p ol ar iz at io n .. .. .. .. .. .
.1 3* .0 9 .2 0* ** ( .0 6 ) ( .1 0 ) ( .0 4 ) N O T E .— T h e ta b le re p or ts on ly th e es ti m at es of th e fo ca l K O F gl ob al iz at io n in d ex an d th e in te ra ct io n s w it h lo ca l co n te xt v ar ia b le s , b u t th e m od el s in cl u d e al l v ar ia b le s re p or te d in ta b le 2 ; n 5 1 , 50 7 .
N u m b er s in p ar en th es es ar e ro b u st S E s. * P < .0 5 , tw o- ta ile d .
** P < .0 1 .
** * P < .0 01 .
All use subject This to Unco ivnte ersnt itydow ofnl Choa icaded go fr Prom ess 12 T8 .
erm250 s .1 and44 .
C14 on4 o ditin A onug s ( hus ttpt 0 : //7 , 2 ww01 w.9 0 jou7 : rn16 al:0 s.u4 A chiM cago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeytemplates to their combination in hybrid forms , the establishment of Anato- lian ImamHatip high schools is facilitated .
The presence of parent forms in a local community together with increases in globalization , therefore , spur hybrid high school founding .
This underscores the observation that “ think- able ” alternative templates that emerge in response to societal change are of- ten building on existing institutions ( Haveman and Rao 2006 ; Schneiberg and Clemens 2006 ) .
Relating to local incentives , wefind that the impact of globalization on the founding rate of hybrid high schools increases with the growth in the num- ber of employers in a local district , as well as with secular-religious polariza- tion .
This provides evidence for our claim that both economic and ideolog- ical incentives trigger local communities to respond to forces of globalization by establishing hybrid organizational forms that blend the global with the local .
That is , a strong local entrepreneurial culture that resonates with eco- nomic globalization stimulates adaptation tobenefit economically fromglob- alization .
Local ideological polarization is another mobilizing force as this intensifies direct ideological competition among different community frac- tions .
Because of globalization , cosmopolitan education based on scientific , rational principles gained importance all over the world.23 In such circum- stances , more traditionalmembers of a community are incentivized to adjust to the Western model of education to keep up with the secular fraction in a globalizingworld.Oneway is to insert key elements of the cosmopolitan tem- plate of education in Islamic education without sacrificing one ’ s religious identity .
In post hoc analyses , we further explored the underlying mechanism by estimating the interaction between the most religious votes and growth in thenumberof employers.Although theproportionof themost religiousvotes has a negative moderating effect on the hybrid high school founding rate , we find that such local communities do adapt to the global world when the community has a strong local entrepreneurship culture .
One interpretation is that adaptation is then instrumental for the traditional religious commu- nity in the sense that the local religious population is motivated to blend the global with the local in order to gain from this economically without sacri- ficing too much their local identity .
A hybrid organizational form such as the Anatolian Imam Hatip high school serves this purpose by merging key elements of cosmopolitan education into an otherwise Islamic teaching tra- dition .
We ran a series of additional analyses to explore the robustness of our findings .
Indeed , our results survive changes in the estimation method , the23 Following Meyer ( 2000 ) , we use “ rationalism ” to refer to the convergence of educa- tional templates based on science .
According toMeyer and his colleagues , both organiza- tions and actors are subject to standardizing rationalization because of globalization that arises from a scientific analysis of nature as universal and lawful .
1857 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allset of control variables , or the measure of globalization .
Substantively , the robustness analyses regarding the different dimensions of globalization— economic , political , and social—are particularly interesting .
These analyses reveal that economic and , particularly , social globalization is important to explain the emergence of hybrid high school forms , whereas political glob- alization is not .
Indeed , this finding is in line with our result that economic and ideological incentives provide the motivation to adapt to the global while preserving the local .
Apparently , political globalization per se does not suffice to affect people ’ smotivation , perhaps because such globalization does not seriously affect the local communities ’ norms and values .
This un- derscores that globalization is also an ideology ( Guillén 2001 ) , which takes time to become part of the cultural mind-set of local communities .
As a re- sult , it is unsurprising that the social dimension of globalization reveals the largest effects on the emergence of hybrid high schools in Turkey .
Post hoc , we also estimatedmodels to further explore the effect of ourmain variables on the founding rate of Anatolian and Imam Hatip high schools ( results are available on request ) .
These analyses reveal that globalization has a significantly positive impact on the founding ofAnatolian high schools , as these schools are the carriers of cosmopolitan values and norms ever since their foundation .
However , globalization has a significantly negative effect on the founding of ImamHatip high schools , as they are out of tune with the increasing influence of globalization .
Conversely , a larger share of the most religious votes has a negativemain impact on the founding rate of Anatolian high schools but stimulates the founding rate of Imam Hatip high schools .
Interestingly , polarization reduces the founding rate of Imam Hatip high schools ( but not that of theAnatolian schools ) .
Overall , the results from these supplementary analyses reflect ourmainfindings regardingAnatolian Imam Hatip high schools .
The pattern of findings suggests that two trends domi- nate in Turkey .
On the one hand , a globalization trend spurs cosmopolitan education , boosting Anatolian high school founding ; on the other hand , lo- cal religious traditions oppose this trend , favoring Imam Hatip high school founding ( and more so when globalization pressures increase ) .
Only when local polarization is high do local communities ( with the most religious vot- ers ) “ adjust ” to increasing globalization by the establishment of hybrid An- atolian Imam Hatip high schools .
In this study , we built on institutional and glocalization theories and com- bined those with insights from organizational ecology in order to under- stand the impact of globalization on the emergence and expansion of hybrid organizational forms .
Hence , our article contributes to the literature in sev- eral ways .
First , until recently , most institutional theory has mainly focused on how higher-order institutional pressures affect lower-level mimetic be- havior leading to field-level convergence ( Schneiberg and Clemens 2006 ) .
Communities and organizations are regarded as relatively passive recipients1858 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in Turkeyof top-down institutional pressures ( DiMaggio and Powell 1983 ) , giving a somewhat “ deterministic ” flavor to institutional theory ( Marquis and Batil- lana 2009 ) .
Our approach underscores the important role of agency and con- testation in whether and how actors are willing to adjust to these pressures .
How institutional pressures , such as globalization processes , unfold depends on place-bound features and therefore requires a systematic study of the het- erogeneity among communities and their organizations .
The bottom line is that actors have a range of responses available when facing institutional pressure ( see also Oliver 1991 ) .
Building on glocalization theory , we show that local cultures may critically adapt or resist global phenomena and that the creation of localities is a standard component of globalization ( Robertson and Khonder 1998 ) .
In order to understand when , where , and why hybrid organizational forms emerge as a reaction to globalization , it is important to analyze the local characteristics that moderate the impact of globalization .
Our study is one of the first systematic , comparative empirical studies ana- lyzing the impact of this interplay on the emergence of hybrid organizational forms , focusing on the role of local resistance , local templates , and local in- centives .
The usefulness of this comparative institutional approach is witnessed by the fact that it allows us to reconcile the many conflicting outcomes of glob- alization that have been discussed in the literature , ranging from conver- gence via hybridization to divergence .
Indeed , our findings suggest that the specific outcomeof globalizationdepends on local conditions in a predictable way .
We also show that different versions of modernity might emerge de- pending on the specific interplay between the global and the local .
Moder- nity is therefore not inherently globalizing , as Giddens ( 1990 ) argued .
Glob- alization is an ideology subject to contestation ( Guillén 2001 ) .
What Western people define as modernity is not what other movements such as Islam and Marxism claim ( Robertson 1992 ; Guillén 2001 ) .
Out of contestation , alter- native models emerge , fueling pluralistic identities that compete for domi- nance .
As Geertz ( 1998 , p. 107 ; cited by Guillén 2001 ) observes , the world “ is growing both more global and more divided , more thoroughly intercon- nected and intricately partitioned at the same time. ” In the context of our study , the diffusion of the hybrid high school form that educates young people to become world citizens who compete for elite functions illustrates that Islam is becoming a global force itself , defining a competing logic in parallel with Western modernity .
This is also demon- strated by the steady growth of the Gülen movement , a transnational reli- gious and social force that has been described as the world ’ s most global movement ( Göle 2000 ; Kuru 2003 ) .
This movement , led by the Turkish Muslim thinker FethullahGülen , is active in educationwith schools inmore than 140 countries and also invests in media , finance , and for-profit health clinics .
The education offered by the Gülen movement is similar to that of1859 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allthe Turkish hybrid high schools , blending global rationalized principles of education with Islam .
The purpose is to form a new synthesis between sci- ence and religion , reason and revelation , and progress and conservatism in- spired by Islam ( Kuru 2003 ) and to encourage practicing Muslims to be ac- tive participants in a globalizing world .
Unsurprisingly , this movement , in turn , is contested inWestern nation-states , such as in the United States and the Netherlands , questioning the good intentions of the movement .
Our study also contributes to organizational ecology , which has a partic- ular interest in explaining where andwhy new organizational forms emerge to understand the dynamics of organizational diversity ( McKendrick et al .
2003 ; Boone and Özcan 2014 ; Bogaert et al .
2016 ) .
This literature further recognizes that organizations are important carriers of ideology that fuel contestation , social change , and adaptation ( Barnett and Woywode 2004 ; Simons and Ingram 2004 ; Sine and Lee 2009 ) .
For instance , cooperative or- ganizations often emerge in response to corporations out of anticorporate sentiments in order to defend the “ commonwealth ” logic against the domi- nant “ mass market ” logic ( Schneiberg et al .
2008 ; Boone and Özcan 2014 ) .
In a similar vein , the educational system responds to globalization by build- ing hybrid schools that serve the purpose of defining and diffusing an al- ternative form of Islamic modernism .
Clearly , organizations are important vehicles of institutional change .
Therefore , the study of how organizational dynamics coevolve with institutions is of great importance , although this is- sue received insufficient attention in prior work ( Haveman and Rao 2006 ) .
Our particular focus on explaining the emergence of hybrid organiza- tional forms implies an additional contribution .
Because hybrid organiza- tional forms build on existing institutional templates , they represent insti- tutional carriers that allow for incremental institutional change , as opposed to discontinuous change , where one logic is discarded and replaced ( Have- man and Rao 2006 ) .
Despite their importance , little attention has been paid to the processes that lead to the emergence of hybrid forms and under which conditions boundaries dissolve to produce hybridity ( Lamont and Molnar 2002 ) .
In this article , we analyze the role of globalization on institutional change that leads to the mixing of blueprints belonging to opposing catego- ries , which is a widely neglected topic in the literature ( Rao et al .
2005 ) .
This is an important omission , as literature shows that hybrid forms meet sharp punishment , particularly if the category codes are oppositional or involve moral imperatives ( Kovács and Hannan 2010 ) .
Our study suggests , how- ever , that if the community has a lot at stake and therefore has a strong motivation for blending oppositional categories , then hybrid forms might emerge without getting penalized .
Thus , to understand the emergence of hy- brids , it is essential to take into account the underlying dynamics that trigger the adaptation process , such as the strong ideological polarization in Turkey.1860 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in TurkeyFinally , our study contributes to the extensive research program on the worldwide diffusion of education systemsbyMeyer et al .
( 1997 , 2010 ) .These scholars argue and report empirical evidence that the expansion of rational- ized modernity leads to enormous convergence in educational systems all over the world .
Although the convergence process is well reflected in the lit- erature ( Anderson-Levitt 2003 ) , research has paid less attention to the vari- ation across different societies and the reasons behind this variation .
In our study , we focused on a more fine-grained community-level analysis , show- ing that variation indeed matters .
Although this seems to undermine the education-system convergence thesis , it is important to stress that Meyer and Hannan ( 1979 ) claimed that isomorphism relates to structural similarity ( so- called similarities of form ) , however decoupled from purpose and intentions ( see alsoGuillén 2001 ) .
Interestingly , this seems tofitwith theAnatolian Imam Hatip high schools we studied : the scientific/rational template is copied while the local religious-inspiredvaluesdefiningpurposeand intentionsare retained .
Our study is not without limitations , which provide opportunities for fur- ther research.Here , wewould like tomention three suchopportunities .
First , our data offer the opportunity formore detailed studies of the underlying dy- namics of district-level movements and countermovements in interaction with country-level globalization .
For instance , we may examine the differ- ences in the speed of adjustment ( or the strength of resistance ) across differ- ent Turkish districts in response to forces of globalization .
Another example is a study of reversed causalities .
In our specification , we took care of this by lagging our key independent variables , but this does not exclude an impact of district-level dynamics on globalization : the founding of cosmopolitan or hybrid high schools may foster forces that may contribute to globalization .
Second , there is the question as to the extent to which our results are gen- eralizable to other settings.Given that globalization is averybroad topic and that there are many different studies in different fields , this question is diffi- cult to answer .
However , we see that similar hybrid organizational forms emerge as a consequence of globalization in other domains of society , an ex- ample being Islamic banks ( Segrado 2005 ) .
Islamic banks operate according to the principles of Islamic law .
Yet , at the same time , the products and ser- vices provided by Islamic banks are similar to the ones offered by conven- tional banks .
Islamic banks are hybrids in the sense of combining modern methods of business and finance with Islamic laws concerning economics .
Another example is the emergence of the integrated Islamic high schools in Indonesia , also in the 1980s ( Hasan 2009 ) .
These schools combine Islamic education with a modern curriculum , too , and are preferred by the elite class .
The reasons behind the emergence of these hybrid school forms can probably be explained by local characteristics similar to the ones in Turkey , such as the growing entrepreneurial class in Indonesia .
And another driver1861 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology Allmay well be the ideological polarization within the different sects of the Muslim population and between different religions ( Hasan 2009 ) .
Third , of similar interest would be to study contexts in which hybrid or- ganizational forms fail to emerge .
Only then can we really understand the boundary conditions of our theory .
The examples above suggest that the emergence of hybrid organizational forms follows from the presence of both segregating and blending forces , particularly for the emergence of hybrid forms that carry rival ideologies .
In the Muslim world , Turkey might be a special case because of the powerful secular movement , as initiated by Ata- turk in the early 20th century .
Perhaps such a national secular policy is a pre- condition for embracing cosmopolitan and globalized patterns .
For that rea- son , the emergence of hybrid schools in a country like Iran is not very likely because of the absence of strong blending forces .
In future work , we hope to further develop the comparative perspective implied by the theory proposed in the current study.APPENDIX TABLE A1 Political Parties and Score on the Secular-Religious Scale ( 1 to 10 ) Political Parties Secular/ Religious Scale Changing Turkey Party ( Degisen Turkiye Partisi ) : 1998–2002 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2 Communist Party of Turkey ( Turkiye Komunist Partisi ) : 2001– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1 Democratic Left Party ( Demokratik Sol Parti ) : 1985– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2 Democratic Party ( Demokratik Parti ) : 1970–80 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
8 Democratic Turkey Party ( Demokrat Turkiye Partisi ) : 1997–2005 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
7 Democracy and Peace Party ( Demokrasi ve Baris Partisi ) : 1996–2002 .
.
.
.
.
.
1 Felicity Party ( Saadet Partisi ) : 2001– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
10 Great Union Party ( Buyuk Birlik Partisi ) : 1993– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
8 Homeland Party ( Yurt Partisi ) : 2002– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
7 Independent Turkey Party ( Bagimsiz Turkiye Partisi ) : 2001– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
10 Justice and Development Party ( Adalet ve Kalkinma Partisi ) : 2001– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
8 Labour Party ( Emek Partisi ) : 1996– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1 Liberal Democratic Party ( Liberal Demokrat Parti ) : 1995– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
5 Motherland Party ( Anavatan Partisi ) : 1983– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
7 Nation Party ( Millet Partisi ) : 1992– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
8 Nationalist Democracy Party ( Milliyetci Demokrasi Partisi ) : 1983–86 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
5 Nationalist Movement Party ( Milliyetci Hareket Partisi ) : 1969– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
8 Nationalist Working Party ( Milliyetci Calisma Partisi ) : 1983–93 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
9 New Democracy Movement ( Yeni Demokrasi Hareketi ) : 1994–97 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
5 New Party ( Yeni Parti ) : 1993–97 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
7 Freedom and Solidarity Party ( Ozgurluk ve Dayanisma Partisi ) : 1996– .
.
.
.
.
1 Peace Party ( Baris Partisi ) : 1996–99 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1 People ’ s Ascent Party ( Halkin Yukselisi Partisi ) : 2005– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
8 People ’ s Democracy Party ( Halkin Demokrasi Partisi ) : 1994–2003 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1 People ’ s Party ( Halkci Parti ) : 1983–85 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
21862 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16 use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals:04 AM .uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in TurkeyTABLE A1 ( Continued ) Political Parties Secular/ Religious Scale Rebirth Party ( Yeniden Dogus Partisi ) : 1992–2002 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
5 Reformist Democracy Party ( Islahatci Demokrasi Partisi ) : 1984–92 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
8 Republican People ’ s Party ( Cumhuriyet Halk Partisi ) : 1923– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2 Social Democratic Populist Party ( Sosyaldemokrat Halkci Parti ) : 1985–95 .
.
.
2 Socialist Government Party ( Sosyalist İktidar Partisi ) : 1993–2001 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1 Socialist Party ( Sosyalist Parti ) : 1988–92 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1 True Path Party ( Dogru Yol Partisi ) : 1983– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
8 Virtue Party ( Fazilet Partisi ) : 1997–2001 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
10 Welfare Party ( Refah Partisi ) : 1983–98 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
10 Worker ’ s Party ( Isci Partisi ) : 1992– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1 Young Party ( Genc Parti ) : 2002– .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
5This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07 All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journREFERENCES Ahmad , Feroz .
1991 .
“ Politics and Islam inModern Turkey. ” Middle Eastern Studies 27 ( 1 ) : 3–21 .
Anderson-Levitt , Kathryn M. 2003 .
Local Meanings , Global Schooling : Anthropology and World Culture Theory .
New York : Palgrave Macmillan .
Ansari , Shahzad M. , Peer C. Fiss , and Edward J. Zajac .
2010 .
“ Made to Fit : How Prac- tices Vary as They Diffuse. ” Academy of Management Review 35 ( 1 ) : 67–92 .
Ardıç , Nurullah .
2009 .
“ Friend or Foe ?
Globalization and Turkey at the Turn of the 21st Century. ” Journal of Economic and Social Research 11 ( 1 ) : 17–42 .
Aydın , Ertan , andYılmaz Çolak .
2004 .
“ Dilemmas of Turkish Democracy : The Encoun- ter between Kemalist Laicism and Islamism in 1990s Turkey. ” Pp .
202–20 in Democ- racy andReligion : Free Exercise andDiverse Visions , edited byDavidW.Odell-Scott .
Kent , Ohio : Kent State University Press .
Ballinger , Gary A .
2004 .
“ Using Generalized Estimating Equations for Longitudinal Data Analysis. ” Organizational Research Methods 7 ( 2 ) : 127–50 .
Barnett , William P. , and Michael Woywode .
2004 .
“ From Red Vienna to the Anschluss : Ideological Competition among Viennese Newspapers during the Rise of National So- cialism. ” American Journal of Sociology 109:1452–99 .
Baron , James N. , Michael T. Hannan , and M. Diane Burton .
2001 .
“ Labor Pains : Orga- nizational Change and Employee Turnover in Young , High-Tech Firms. ” American Journal of Sociology 106 ( 4 ) : 960–1012 .
Barron , David N. , and Michael T. Hannan .
1991 .
“ Autocorrelation and Density Depen- dence in Organizational Founding Rates. ” Sociological Methods and Research 20 ( 2 ) : 218–41 .
Benson , J. Kenneth .
1977 .
“ Organizations : A Dialectical View. ” Administrative Science Quarterly 22 ( 1 ) : 1–21 .
Bergh , Andreas , and Therese Nilsson .
2010 .
“ Do Liberalization and Globalization In- crease Income Inequality ? ” European Journal of Political Economy 26 ( 4 ) : 488–505 .
Bogaert , Sandy , Christophe Boone , Giacomo Negro , and Arjen van Witteloostuijn .
2016 .
“ Organizational Form Emergence : A Meta-Analysis of the Ecological Theory of Legitimation. ” Journal of Management 42 ( 5 ) : 1344–73 .
Boli , John , and George M. Thomas .
1999 .
Constructing World Culture .
Stanford , Calif. : Stanford University Press.1863 :16:04 AM als.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology AllBoone , Christophe , Anil Divarci , and Arjen van Witteloostuijn .
2011 .
“ Ideological Po- larization and Organizational Form Evolution : A Study of Islamic-Secular Rivalry and High Schools in Turkey , 1971–1998. ” Unpublished manuscript .
University of Antwerp .
Boone , Christophe , and Serden Özcan .
2014 .
“ WhyDo Cooperatives Emerge in aWorld Dominated by Corporations ?
The Diffusion of Cooperatives in the US Bio-ethanol In- dustry , 1978–2013. ” Academy of Management Journal 57 ( 4 ) : 990–1012 .
Brady , David , Jason Beckfield , and Wei Zhao .
2007 .
“ The Consequences of Economic Globalization for Affluent Democracies. ” Annual Review of Sociology 33:313–34 .
Campbell , John L. 2004 .
Institutional Change andGlobalization .
Princeton , N.J. : Prince- ton University Press .
Çarkoğlu , Ali , and Binnaz Toprak .
2007 .
“ Religion , Society and Politics in a Changing Turkey. ” Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation , Istanbul .
Carroll , Glenn R. , and Michael T. Hannan .
2000 .
The Demography of Corporations and Industries .
Princeton , N.J. : Princeton University Press .
Cattani , Gino , JohannesM .
Pennings , and Filippo CarloWezel .
2003 .
“ Spatial and Tem- poral Heterogeneity in Founding Patterns. ” Organization Science 14 ( 6 ) : 670–85 .
Chang , Chi-Hung , and Chien-Chiang Lee .
2012 .
“ Non-linearity between Life Insurance and Economic Development : A Revisited Approach. ” Geneva Risk and Insurance Re- view 37:223–57 .
Chang , Chun-Ping , Chien-Chiang Lee , andMeng-Chi Hsieh .
2011 .
“ Globalization , Real Output , and Multiple Structural Breaks. ” Global Economic Review 40 ( 4 ) : 421–44 .
Chase-Dunn , Christopher .
1999 .
“ Globalization : AWorld-Systems Perspective. ” Journal of World-Systems Research 5 ( 2 ) : 186–215 .
Cizre , Ümit , and Erinç Yeldan .
2005 .
“ TheTurkish Encounter withNeo-liberalism : Eco- nomics and Politics in the 2000/2001 Crises. ” Review of International Political Econ- omy 12 ( 3 ) : 387–408 .
Demir , Ömer , Mustafa Acar , andMetin Toprak .
2004 .
“ AnatolianTigers or Islamic Cap- ital : Prospects and Challenges. ” Middle Eastern Studies 40 ( 6 ) : 166–88 .
DiMaggio , Paul J. , andWalter W. Powell .
1983 .
“ The Iron Cage Revisited : Institutional Isomorphism andCollective Rationality in Organizational Fields. ” American Sociolog- ical Review 48:147–60 .
Djelic , Marie-Laure , and Kerstin Sahlin-Andersson .
2006 .
Transnational Governance : Institutional Dynamics of Regulation .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
Dobrev , Stanislav D. , Salih Zeki Özdemir , and Albert C. Teo .
2006 .
“ The Ecological In- terdependence of Emergent and Established Organizational Populations : Legitimacy Transfer , Violation byComparison , andUnstable Identities. ” Organization Science 17 ( 5 ) : 577–97 .
Dorian , Jones .
1997 .
“ Higher Education in Turkey. ” Times Higher Education Supple- ment , no .
1277:10 .
Dreher , Axel .
2006 .
“ Does Globalization Affect Growth ?
Empirical Evidence from a New Index. ” Applied Economics 38 ( 10 ) : 1091–1110 .
Eckhardt , JonathanT. , and Scott A. Shane .
2003 .
“ Opportunities andEntrepreneurship. ” Journal of Management 29 ( 3 ) : 333–49 .
Esteban , Joan-Maria , and Debraj Ray .
1994 .
“ On the Measurement of Polarization. ” Econometrica 62 ( 4 ) : 819–51 .
Fiss , Peer C. , Mark T. Kennedy , and Gerald F. Davis .
2012 .
“ How Golden Parachutes Unfolded : Diffusion and Variation of a Controversial Practice. ” Organization Science 23 ( 4 ) : 1077–99 .
Gamson , William A .
1992 .
Talking Politics .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
Geertz , Clifford .
1998 .
“ TheWorld in Pieces : Culture and Politics at the End of the Cen- tury. ” Focaal : Tijdschift voor Antropologie 32:91–117 .
Giddens , Anthony .
1990 .
The Consequence of Modernity .
Stanford , Calif. : Stanford Uni- versity Press.1864 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in TurkeyGökaçtı , Mehmet Ali .
2005 .
Türkiye ’ de Din Eğitimi ve İmamHatipler .
Istanbul : İletişim Yayınları .
Göle , Nilüfer .
2000 .
“ Snapshots of Islamic Modernities. ” Daedalus 129 ( 1 ) : 91–117 .
Guillén , Mauro F. 2001 .
“ Is Globalization Civilizing , Destructive or Feeble ?
A Critique of Five Key Debates in the Social Science Literature. ” Annual Review of Sociology 27:235–60 .
Güven , İsmail .
2005 .
“ The Impact of Political Islam on Education : The Revitalization of Islamic Education in the Turkish Educational Setting. ” International Journal of Ed- ucational Development 25 ( 3 ) : 193–208 .
Hamilton , James D. 1994 .
Time Series Analysis .
Princeton , N.J. : Princeton University Press .
Hannan , Michael T. 2010 .
“ Partiality ofMemberships in Categories and Audiences. ” An- nual Review of Sociology 36:159–81 .
Hannan , Michael T. , and John Freeman .
1987 .
“ The Ecology of Organizational Found- ing : American Labor Unions , 1836–1985. ” American Journal of Sociology 92 ( 4 ) : 910–43 .
——— .
1989 .
Organizational Ecology .
Cambridge , Mass .
: Harvard University Press .
Hannan , Michael T. , László Pólos , and Glenn R. Carroll .
2007 .
Logics of Organization Theory : Audiences , Codes , and Ecologies .
Princeton , N.J. : Princeton University Press .
Harrison , GlennW. , Thomas F. Rutherford , andDavid G. Tarr .
1993 .
“ Trade Reform in the Partially Liberalized Economy of Turkey. ” World Bank Economic Review 7 ( 2 ) : 191–218 .
Harvey , David .
1989 .
The Condition of Postmodernity : An Inquiry into the Origins of Cultural Change .
Oxford : Blackwell .
Hasan , Noorhaidi .
2009 .
“ Islamizing Formal Education : Integrated Islamic School and New Trends in Formal Education Institution in Indonesia. ” RSIS working paper no .
172 .
S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies , Nanyang Technological Uni- versity .
Hasenfeld , Yeheskel , and Benjamin Gidron .
2005 .
“ Understanding Multi-purpose Hy- brid Voluntary Organizations : The Contributions of Theories on Civil Society , Social Movements and Non-profit Organizations. ” Journal of Civil Society 1 ( 2 ) : 97–112 .
Haveman , Heather A. , and Hayagreeva Rao .
1997 .
“ Structuring a Theory of Moral Sen- timents : Institutional and Organizational Coevolution in the Early Thrift Industry. ” American Journal of Sociology 102:1606–51 .
——— .
2006 .
“ Hybrid Forms and the Evolution of Thrifts. ” American Behavioral Sci- ence 49 ( 7 ) : 984–96 .
Haveman , Heather A. , Hayagreeva Rao , and Srikanth Paruchuri .
2007 .
“ The Winds of Change : The Progressive Movement and the Bureaucratization of Thrift. ” American Sociological Review 72:117–42 .
Held , David .
1998 .
“ Democracy and Globalization. ” Pp .
11–27 inRe-imagining Political Community Studies in Cosmopolitan Democracy , edited by D. Archibugi , D. Held , and M. Köhler .
Stanford , Calif. : Stanford University Press .
Held , David , Anthony McGrew , David Goldblatt , and Jonathan Perraton .
1999 .
Global Transformations .
Stanford , Calif. : Stanford University Press .
Helvacioglu , Banu .
2000 .
“ Globalization in the Neighborhood : From the Nation State to Bilkent Center. ” International Sociology 15 ( 2 ) : 326–42 .
Heper , Metin , and Aylin Güney .
2000 .
“ The Military and the Consolidation of Democ- racy : The Recent Turkish Experience. ” Journal of Armed Forces and Society 26 ( 4 ) : 635–58 .
Hsu , Greta , Michael T. Hannan , and Özgecan Koçak .
2009 .
“ Multiple Category Mem- bership in Markets : An Integrative Theory and Two Empirical Tests. ” American So- ciological Review 74 ( 1 ) : 150–69 .
Ingram , Paul , and Hayagreeva Rao .
2004 .
“ Store Wars : The Enactment and Repeal of Anti-Chain-StoreLegislation inAmerica. ” AmericanJournalof Sociology110 ( 2 ) :446–87.1865 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology AllKaya , Ibrahim .
2004 .
Social Theory and Later Modernities : The Turkish Experience .
Liverpool : Liverpool University Press .
Kennedy , Mark Thomas , and Peer Christian Fiss .
2009 .
“ Institutionalization , Framing , andDiffusion : The Logic of TQMAdoption and Implementation Decisions amongUS Hospitals. ” Academy of Management Journal 52 ( 5 ) : 897–918 .
Kern , Thomas .
2010 .
“ Translating Global Values into National Contexts : The Rise of Environmentalism in South Korea. ” International Sociology 25 ( 6 ) : 869–96 .
Keyman , E. Fuat .
2007 .
“ Modernity , Secularism and Islam : The Case of Turkey. ” The- ory , Culture and Society 24 ( 2 ) : 215–34 .
Keyman , E. Fuat , and Berrin Koyuncu .
2005 .
“ Globalization , Alternative Modernities and the Political Economy of Turkey. ” Review of International Political Economy 12 ( 1 ) : 105–29 .
Kirzner , Israel M. 1997 .
“ Entrepreneurial Discovery and the Competitive Market Pro- cess : An Austrian Approach. ” Journal of Economic Literature 35:60–85 .
Kovács , Balázs , and Michael T. Hannan .
2010 .
“ The Consequences of Category Span- ning Depend on Contrast. ” Research in the Sociology of Organizations 31:593–99 .
Kuru , Ahmet T. 2003 .
“ Fethullah Gülen ’ s Search for a Middle Way between Modernity andMuslim Tradition. ” Pp .
115–30 in Turkish Islam and the Secular State : The Gülen Movement , edited by M. Hakan Yavuz and John L. Esposito .
Syracuse , N.Y. : Syra- cuse University Press .
Kurzman , Charles .
1998 .
“ Organizational Opportunity and Social Movement Mobiliza- tion : A Comparative Analysis of Four Religious Movements. ” Mobilization 3 ( 1 ) : 23– 49 .
Lamont , Michèle , and Virág Molnar .
2002 .
“ The Study of Boundaries in the Social Sci- ences. ” Annual Review of Sociology 28:167–95 .
Landau , Jacob M. 1997 .
“ Turkey between Secularism and Islamism. ” Jerusalem Letter/ Viewpoints , no .
352 .
Liang , Kung-Yee , and Scott L. Zeger .
1986 .
“ Longitudinal Data Analysis Using Gener- alized Linear Models. ” Biometrika 73 ( 1 ) : 13–22 .
Marquis , Christopher , and Julie Battilana .
2009 .
“ ActingGlobally but Thinking Locally ?
The Enduring Influence of Local Communities on Organizations. ” Research in Orga- nizational Behavior 29:283–302 .
Marquis , Christopher , and Zhi Huang .
2009 .
“ The Contingent Nature of Public Policy and the Growth of US Commercial Banking. ” Academy of Management Journal 52 ( 6 ) : 1222–46 .
Marquis , Christopher , and Michael Lounsbury .
2007 .
“ Vive La Resistance : Competing Logics and the Consolidation of the U.S. Community Banking. ” Academy of Manage- ment Journal 50 ( 4 ) : 799–820 .
McCullagh , Peter , and John A. Nelder .
1989 .
Generalized Linear Models .
Boca Raton , Fla. : CRC Press .
McGrew , Anthony .
1997 .
“ Democracy beyond Borders. ” Pp .
231–66 in The Transforma- tion of Democracy ?
Globalization and Territorial Democracy , edited by Anthony Mc- Grew .
Cambridge : Polity .
McKendrick , David G. , Jonathan Jaffee , Glenn R. Carroll , and Olga M. Khessina .
2003 .
“ In the Bud ?
Disk Array Producers as a ( Possibly ) Emergent Organizational Form. ” Administrative Science Quarterly 48 ( 1 ) : 60–93 .
Meyer , DavidS. , andSuzanneStaggenborg .
1996 .
“ Movements , Countermovements , and the Structure of Political Opportunity. ” American Journal of Sociology 101 ( 6 ) : 1628– 60 .
Meyer , John W. 2000 .
“ Globalization : Sources and Effects on National States and Soci- eties. ” International Sociology 15 ( 2 ) : 233–48 .
Meyer , JohnW. , JohnBoli , GeorgeM .
Thomas , andFranciscoO .
Ramirez .
1997 .
“ World Society and the Nation-State. ” American Journal of Sociology 103 ( 1 ) : 144–81.1866 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
Emergence of Hybrid Islamic Schools in TurkeyMeyer , John W. , Patricia Bromley , and Francisco O. Ramirez .
2010 .
“ Human Rights in Social Science Textbooks : Cross-National Analysis , 1970–2008. ” Sociology of Educa- tion 83 ( 4 ) : 111–34 .
Meyer , John W. , and Michael T. Hannan .
1979 .
“ National Development in a Changing World System : An Overview. ” Pp .
3–16 in National Development and the World Sys- tem : Educational , Economic , and Political Change , 1950–1970 , edited by John W. Meyer and Michael T. Hannan .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press .
Minkoff , Debra C. 1994 .
“ From Service Provision to Institutional Advocacy : The Shift- ing Legitimacy of Organizational Forms. ” Social Forces 72 ( 4 ) : 943–69 .
——— .
2002 .
“ The Emergence of Hybrid Organizational Forms : Combining Identity- Based Service Provision and Political Action. ” Non-profit and Voluntary Sector Quar- terly 31 ( 3 ) : 377–401 .
Nielsen , François , and Michael T. Hannan .
1977 .
“ The Expansion of National Educa- tional Systems : Tests of a Population Ecology Model. ” American Sociological Review 42 ( 3 ) : 479–90 .
Oliver , Amalya L. , andKathleenMontgomery .
2000 .
“ Creating aHybrid Organizational Form from Parental Blueprints : The Emergence and Evolution of Knowledge Firms. ” Human Relations 53 ( 1 ) : 33–56 .
Oliver , Christine .
1991 .
“ Strategic Responses to Institutional Processes. ” Academy of Management Review 16 ( 1 ) : 145–79 .
Olzak , Susan , andElizabethWest .
1991 .
“ Ethnic Conflict and the Rise and Fall of Ethnic Newspapers. ” American Sociological Review 56:458–74 .
Önis , Ziya .
1997 .
“ The Political Economy of Islamic Resurgence in Turkey : The Rise of the Welfare Party in Perspective. ” Third World Quarterly 18 ( 4 ) : 743–66 .
Özbudun , Ergun , and E. Fuat Keyman .
2002 .
“ Cultural Globalization in Turkey. ” Pp .
296–321 inMany Globalizations , edited by P. L. Berger and S. P. Huntington .
Ox- ford : Oxford University Press .
Özgür , İren .
2012 .
Islamic Schools in Modern Turkey : Faith , Politics , and Education .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
Pak , Soon-Yong .
2004 .
“ Cultural Politics and Vocational Religious Education : The Case of Turkey. ” Comparative Education 40 ( 3 ) : 321–41 .
Pekarskiene , Irena , and Rozita Susniene .
2011 .
“ An Assessment of the Level of Global- ization in the Baltic States. ” Engineering Economics 22 ( 1 ) : 58–68 .
Potrafke , Niklas .
2010 .
“ Labor Market Deregulation and Globalization : Empirical Evi- dence from OECD Countries. ” Review of World Economics 146 ( 3 ) : 545–71 .
Rabasa , Angel , and F. Stephen Larrabee .
2008 .
The Rise of Political Islam in Turkey .
Santa Monica , Calif. : Rand Corporation .
Rao , Hayagreeva , Philippe Monin , and Rodolphe Durand .
2005 .
“ Border Crossing : Bri- colage and the Erosion of Categorical Boundaries in French Gastronomy. ” American Sociological Review 70 ( 6 ) : 968–91 .
Rao , Hayagreeva , Lori QingyuanYue , and Paul Ingram .
2011 .
“ Laws of Attraction : Reg- ulatory Arbitrage in the Face of Activism in Right-to-Work States. ” American Socio- logical Review 76 ( 3 ) : 365–85 .
Ritzer , George .
1993 .
The McDonaldization of Society .
London : Pine Forge Press .
Robertson , Roland .
1992.Globalization : Social Theory andGlobal Culture .
London : Sage .
Robertson , Roland , andHabibHaque Khonder .
1998 .
“ Discourses of Globalization. ” In- ternational Sociology 13 ( 1 ) : 25–40 .
Saito , Hiro .
2011 .
“ Cosmopolitan Nation-Building : The Institutional Contradiction and Politics of Postwar Japanese Education. ” Social Science Japan Journal 14 ( 2 ) : 125–44 .
Sakallıoğlu , Ümit Cizre .
1996 .
“ Parameters and Strategies of Islam-State Interaction in Republican Turkey. ” International Journal of Middle East Studies 28 ( 2 ) : 231–51 .
Salt , Jeremy .
1995 .
“ Nationalism and the Rise of Muslim Sentiment in Turkey. ” Middle Eastern Studies 31 ( 1 ) : 13–27.1867 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
American Journal of Sociology AllSassen , Saskia .
1991.TheGlobal City : NewYork , London , Tokyo .
Princeton , N.J .
: Prince- ton University Press .
Schneiberg , Marc .
2007 .
“ What ’ s on the Path ?
Path Dependence , Organizational Diver- sity and the Problem of Institutional Change in the U.S. Economy , 1900–1950. ” Socio- economic Review 5 ( 1 ) : 47–80 .
Schneiberg , Marc , and Elizabeth S. Clemens .
2006 .
“ The Typical Tools for the Job : Re- search Strategies in Institutional Analysis. ” Sociological Theory 24 ( 3 ) : 195–227 .
Schneiberg , Marc , Marissa King , and Thomas Smith .
2008 .
“ Social Movements and Or- ganizational Form : Cooperative Alternatives to Corporations in the American Insur- ance , Dairy and Grain Industries. ” American Sociological Review 73:635–67 .
Schneiberg , Marc , and Michael Lounsbury .
2008 .
“ Social Movements and Institutional Analysis. ” Pp .
648–70 in Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism , edited by R. Greenwood , C. Oliver , K. Sahlin-Andersson , and R. Suddaby .
London : Sage .
Scott , W. Richard .
2008 .
“ Approaching Adulthood : The Maturing of Institutional The- ory. ” Theory and Society 37:427–42 .
Segrado , Chiara .
2005 .
“ Islamic Microfinance and Socially Responsible Investments. ” MEDA Project .
University of Torino .
Sezer , Duygu B .
1993 .
State and Society in Turkey : Continuity and Change ?
SantaMon- ica , Calif. : Rand Corporation .
Shane , Scott , and Sankaran Venkataraman .
2000 .
“ The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research. ” Academy of Management Review 25 ( 1 ) : 217–26 .
Simons , Tal , and Paul Ingram .
2004 .
“ An Ecology of Ideology : Theory and Evidence from Four Populations. ” Industrial and Corporate Change 13 ( 1 ) : 33–59 .
Sine , Wesley D. , and Brandon H. Lee .
2009 .
“ Tilting at Windmills ?
The Environmental Movement and the Emergence of the US Wind Energy Sector. ” Administrative Sci- ence Quarterly 54 ( 1 ) : 123–55 .
Somel , Selçuk Akşin .
2001 .
TheModernization of Public Education in the Ottoman Em- pire , 1839–1908 : Islamization , Autocracy , and Discipline .
Boston : Brill .
Tilly , Charles .
1978 .
From Mobilization to Revolution .
New York : McGraw-Hill .
Wezel , Filippo Carlo .
2005 .
“ Location Dependence and Industry Evolution : Founding Rates in the United KingdomMotorcycle Industry , 1895–1993. ” Organization Studies 26 ( 5 ) : 729–54 .
Yavuz , M.Hakan .
1997 .
“ Political Islam and theWelfare ( Refah ) Party in Turkey. ” Com- parative Politics 30 ( 1 ) : 63–82 .
Zürcher , Eric J .
2004 .
Turkey : A Modern History .
London : IB Tauris.1868 This content downloaded from 128.250.144.144 on August 07 , 2019 07:16:04 AM use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c ) .
