Einstein_AmJourPoliSci_2017_mxyQ.pdf
agLZvgQ1lmN1aCSqHc0yZqDsLcWG-Einstein_AmJourPoliSci_2017_mxyQ.pdf.plain.html

Does Race Affect Access to Government Services ?
An Experiment Exploring Street-Level Bureaucrats and Access to Public Housing Katherine Levine Einstein Boston University David M. Glick Boston University Abstract : While experimental studies of local election officials have found evidence of racial discrimination , we know little about whether these biases manifest in bureaucracies that provide access to valuable government programs and are less tied to politics .
We address these issues in the context of affordable housing programs using a randomized field experiment .
We explore responsiveness to putative white , black , and Hispanic requests for aid in the housing application process .
In contrast to prior findings , public housing officials respond at equal rates to black and white email requests .
We do , however , find limited evidence of responsiveness discrimination toward Hispanics .
Moreover , we observe substantial differences in email tone .
Hispanic housing applicants were 20 percentage points less likely to be greeted by name than were their black and white counterparts .
This disparity in tone is somewhat more muted in more diverse locations , but it does not depend on whether a housing official is Hispanic .
Replication Materials : The data , code , and any additional materials required to replicate all analyses in this arti- cle are available on the American Journal of Political Science Dataverse within the Harvard Dataverse Network , at : http : //dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/1HOVTU .
Scholars across the social sciences have used ex-periments to test for racial bias in a wide rangeof arenas , including patient evaluations , job ap- plications , and professors ’ responses to student requests ( Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004 ; Doleac and Stein 2013 ; Milkman , Akinola , and Chugh 2014 ; Pager , Western , and Bonikowski 2009 ; Schulman et al .
1999 ) .
In political sci- ence , audit-style experiments have focused on state leg- islators ’ and local election officials ’ responses to con- stituent requests about voting ( Butler and Broockman 2011 ; McClendon 2016 ; White , Nathan , and Faller 2015 ) .
It goes without saying that understanding elected and election officials is critical and valuable , and that any bias that affects access to voting is an important po- litical science matter .
Without dismissing the substan- Katherine Levine Einstein is Assistant Professor , Department of Political Science , Boston University , Boston , MA 02215 ( kleinst @ bu.edu ) .
David M. Glick is Assistant Professor , Department of Political Science , Boston University , Boston , MA 02215 ( dmglick @ bu.edu ) .
Authors ’ names are listed alphabetically .
Einstein is the corresponding author .
Thanks to David Broockman , Dan Butler , Joe Doherty , Christian Grose , Ariel White , participants at the 2015 University of Southern California SoCLASS conference and the 2015 SPSA conference , and the three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments .
Additional thanks to Brianna Bloodgood , Rob Pressel , and Ramya Ravindrababu for outstanding research assistance .
Any errors are our own .
1One political science study , to our knowledge , does experimentally evaluate these issues ( Ernst , Nguyen , and Taylor 2013 ) .
Because it was an in-person study of interactions at local welfare offices , though , it was necessarily much smaller in scale , and thus likely less generalizable ( n=54 ) .
tive and normative implications of biased responses to queries about voting procedures , we argue that this line of scholarship misses a crucial quantity of interest far more relevant to the day-to-day lives of people who reach out to government : access to tangible benefits and programs.1 The supply of social services—particularly those tar- geted to low-income individuals—is limited .
Moreover , accessing many of these programs is complex .
For these reasons , potential beneficiaries will need to rely on street- level bureaucrats who are positioned to adversely affect access if they discriminate against potential beneficiaries in ways consistent with findings from similar contexts ( Butler and Broockman 2011 ; McClendon 2016 ; White , Nathan , and Faller 2015 ) .
Indeed , an ample literature American Journal of Political Science , Vol .
61 , No .
1 , January 2017 , Pp .
100–116 C©2016 , Midwest Political Science Association DOI : 10.1111/ajps.12252 100 DOES RACE AFFECT ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT SERVICES ?
101 suggests that , in the absence of clear rules designed to preclude discrimination , bureaucrats with discretion can act according to their own biases ( Brodkin 1997 ; Jones et al .
1977 ; Katznelson 2005 ; Lieberman 1998 ; Lipsky 1980 ) .
We use the case of affordable housing and our own audit-style experiment of over 1,000 housing authorities to test whether street-level bureaucrats discriminate when citizens attempt to access substantive programs and ser- vices ( see , e.g. , Grose 2014 on using field experiments to study institutions , including a call for studies of bu- reaucrats ) .
Public housing is scarce and in high demand .
Roughly 1.2 million individuals currently reside in public housing managed by over 3,300 public housing author- ities ( Department of Housing and Urban Development [ HUD ] 2015a ) .
Recipients represent a small fraction of the total population in need of such programs .
For exam- ple , in October 2014 , the city of Chicago opened its wait lists for the first time in 4 years .
It received 80,000 applica- tions in one day ( Bowean 2014 ) .
Street-level bureaucrats play an important role in helping public housing seek- ers navigate the at-times byzantine application process .
Baltimore is illustrative : Applicants were only allowed to apply for a Section 8 voucher ( which subsidizes private market rentals ) October 22–30 , 2014 , and they were re- quired to apply online .
Paralleling previous field experiments in political sci- ence and other fields , we e-mail public housing officials with putative constituent service requests using identifi- ably white , black , and Hispanic names .
While it is cer- tainly reasonable to ask whether an additional field ex- periment using this design can contribute substantively important findings , we believe our study offers several advantages .
First and foremost , public housing officials constitute a more generalizable test of bureaucratic dis- crimination than do the election officials who were the subject of a recent , and impressive , audit study that con- cluded that bureaucrats discriminate ( White , Nathan , and Faller 2015 ) .
While voter registration is important , it is inherently political .
Barring nefarious activity , it is also an abundant resource .
Public housing is neither .
Instead , housing agencies are precisely the sort of au- tonomous bureaucracies—featuring standardized federal procedures with many functions devolved to the local level—highlighted in theories of street-level bureaucrats ’ behavior .
In addition , we believe that our outcome vari- ables offer a useful mix of familiarity and novelty .
While we measure responsiveness in familiar ways , we also in- clude an additional dependent variable , tone , that has received much less attention .
We argue that tone can af- fect the ultimate distribution of benefits in subtle but important and underappreciated ways .
Moreover , while finding more evidence of bias holds obvious interest , results that fail to show bias—as is the case with some of ours—are also important .
Given the well-deserved prominence of recent experimental studies of racial discrimination , and the gravity of the subject and the results , findings that question the generalizability of existing cases are especially important ( see Arceneaux and Butler 2016 for more on the importance of reporting null results from well-designed experiments ) .
Against an abundance of results documenting discrimination , find- ings of its absence are vital for suggesting pathways by which it might be curbed .
Thus , any null results may both serve as an important brake on overgeneralization in the literature and provide valuable practical lessons for countering discriminatory tendencies .
Our results reveal a mix of striking patterns and non- patterns .
First , we do not find evidence of responsiveness discrimination in general .
In fact , we find evidence contra other well-designed experiments ’ findings of discrimina- tion against blacks .
Second , when focusing on tone , we do observe meaningful differences .
Ostensibly Hispanic e-mailers were about 20 percentage points less likely to be addressed by name at the beginning of responses than were their black and white counterparts .
Further analysis focused on the demographics of officials and commu- nities provides some tentative , but mixed , support for theories of representative bureaucracy , familiarity bias , and contact theory .
We conclude by discussing possible explanations for the relative lack of racial bias in our study , including the racial demographics of public housing , fair housing legislation , and bureaucratic professionalism .
Racial Bias and Bureaucracy We consider two potential types of harm that could emerge if bureaucrats discriminate in their responses .
The first is straightforward and well trod in previous field experiments : the failure to provide relevant , factual information .
By not responding , and thus not offering information about the complicated application process , a bureaucrat likely increases the challenges associated with applying for public housing and reduces one ’ s likelihood of completing the process .
The second is somewhat more subtle and less widely used.2 A bureaucrat could respond , but her tone could be less friendly and encouraging to members of particular groups .
Recipients of unfriendly communications might lose confidence in their chances 2White , Nathan , and Faller ( 2015 ) feature friendliness as one of their dependent variables , though it does not comprise a central component of their analysis .
102 KATHERINE LEVINE EINSTEIN AND DAVID M. GLICK of obtaining the resources they are pursuing or lower their trust in the organization .
They might also make inferences about the effort an official will exert on their behalf over an inherently long process .
All of these mechanisms could make applicants less likely to follow up with additional in- quiries or diminish the likelihood they obtain the desired service for other reasons .
Both individual and institutional factors point to po- tential discrimination in social service provision .
Sadly , a strong reason to foresee discrimination is the fact that hu- man beings administer these programs .
Previous research in political science and a variety of related fields suggests that we should observe fewer and less friendly responses to black and Hispanic constituents .
Racial stereotypes re- main widespread ( Bobo 2001 ) and a powerful influence on American public opinion ( Kinder and Kam 2009 ) .
These biases have manifested in a wide variety of settings .
All else equal , blacks and Hispanics making queries about voting procedures are less likely to receive responses from state legislators and local election officials than whites ( Butler and Broockman 2011 ; White , Nathan , and Faller 2015 ) .
Outside of political outcomes , blacks and His- panics receive fewer callbacks for low-wage jobs ( Pager , Western , and Bonikowski 2009 ) and fewer e-mails from faculty members concerning research opportuni- ties ( Milkman , Akinola , and Chugh 2014 ) than whites do .
They are also told about and shown fewer available homes and apartments ( Turner et al .
2013 ) , receive fewer e-mails and lower bids when selling goods online ( Doleac and Stein 2013 ) , and told higher prices when buying used cars ( Ayres and Siegelman 1995 ) .3 Quite simply , one could predict bias by assuming that the tendencies and psychology that affect other gov- ernment officials , professors , realtors , and online sell- ers also affect social service employees .
Moreover , social resources , notably public housing , are generally scarce .
Such scarcity may create especially strong incentives for discrimination .
There is also some empirical evidence to support the intuition that discrimination manifests among social service bureaucrats ( Davis , Livermore , and Lim 2011 ; Ernst , Nguyen , and Taylor 2013 ; Fording , Soss , and Schram 2007 ; Keiser , Mueser , and Choi 2004 ; Schram et al .
2009 ) .
Devolution of welfare policy has yielded significant variation in autonomous welfare offices ’ sanc- tions of participants .
This variation includes more ex- plicit sanctions and negative treatment for racial minori- ties ( Ernst , Nguyen , and Taylor 2013 ; Fording , Soss , and Schram 2007 ; Keiser , Mueser , and Choi 2004 ) .
On balance , this evidence provides strong reasons to expect at least as 3The Doleac and Stein ( 2013 ) and Ayres and Siegelman ( 1995 ) studies focus exclusively on black-white discrimination .
much discrimination in social welfare service provision as other scholars have found in other arenas .
Similar institu- tional factors related to devolution and frontline officials ’ roles apply to some of the cases in the literature and to public housing .
Taking these lines of thinking in concert brings us to the first hypothesis : H1 : All else equal , bureaucrats will be less responsive and less friendly to blacks and Hispanics than they are to whites .
On the other hand , there are also reasons to expect mechanisms unique to bureaucratic social service pro- vision to mitigate broad discriminatory tendencies .
One prominent line of scholarship uses the racial classifica- tion model to explain discrimination specifically in the social welfare context ( Schram et al .
2009 ; Soss , Fording , and Schram 2008 ) ; this research predicts that we should observe racially discriminatory sanctions when minor- ity clients are perceived as less motivated or responsible .
So Hypothesis 1 ’ s predictions may not hold up in the absence of cues signaling a lack of client reliability .
How- ever , because the primary interest of this research is in sanctioning and disciplinary action—rather than the re- sponsiveness of central interest in our study and other audit-style analyses—it is unclear how relevant these the- oretical predictions will be to our study .
In addition , the theory of representative bureau- cracy also implies that we may observe differences in responsiveness to blacks and Hispanics , and that both groups may receive better service than postulated in Hypothesis 1 .
Scholars have long been concerned about whether bureaucracies , as unelected bodies tasked with critical aspects of policy implementation , pose a threat to democratic representation .
One line of research in pub- lic administration argues that these fears may be over- stated .
Rather than acting as unrepresentative bodies of unelected officials guided by individual or institutional interests , bureaucracies can represent the interests of their constituents .
These scholars argue that bureaucrats whose traits coincide with a population ’ s demographic diversity are more apt to actively represent constituents ’ interests ( Krislov 1974 ; Mosher 1968 ) , particularly in the case of otherwise disadvantaged minority groups ( Bradbury and Kellough 2011 ; Coleman , Brudney , and Kellough 1998 ; Krislov 1974 ; Meier 1993 ; Meier , Wrinkle , and Polinard 1999 ; Sowa and Selden 2003 ; though see Ernst , Nguyen , and Taylor 2013 ) .
A similar , but related , literature finds fa- vorable interactions when citizens and bureaucrats share race , ethnicity , or gender ( Epp , Maynard-Moody , and Haider-Markel 2013 ; Riccucci , Van Ryzin , and Lavena 2014 ) .
This line of scholarship brings us to our second hypothesis : DOES RACE AFFECT ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT SERVICES ?
103 H2 : All else equal , bureaucrats will be more re- sponsive and friendly to members of their own racial/ethnic groups .
While some of the representative bureaucracy schol- arship ( Meier , Wrinkle , and Polinard 1999 ) contends that demographic diversity among bureaucrats will lift the fortunes of all of a bureaucracy ’ s constituents—not just coethnic constituents—for simplicity ’ s sake , we focus on the most basic version of representative bureaucracy .
A third closely linked hypothesis stems from the- ories of intergroup contact ( Allport 1954 ; Pettrigrew 1998 ) and familiarity bias ( Tversky and Kahneman 1972 ) .
Putting aside bureaucrats ’ demographic characteristics , we might anticipate an inclination to aid members of groups with which they are most familiar .
Contact may diminish discriminatory biases , or psychological mecha- nisms may prompt individuals to favor the familiar over the novel .
Given the power differential between casework- ers and clients and the inherent community-based nature of housing , we suspect that the important contact will take place in the local community outside of a social service agency .
This leads us to our third hypothesis : H3 : All else equal , bureaucrats exposed to more black and Hispanic constituents will be more respon- sive and friendlier to blacks and Hispanics , re- spectively .
The Case of Public Housing To evaluate these predictions , we selected the case of pub- lic housing .
We opted for it over other plausible candidates because it is a federal program that is heavily devolved to the local level .
Common federal guidelines make local housing authorities simultaneously institutionally com- parable and highly autonomous .
We should not expect , for example , housing authorities in the South to be radi- cally different ( institutionally , at least ) from those in the East , or for variations in state laws to affect outcomes .
In- deed , all public housing authorities are administering the same federal programs : subsidized housing choice vouch- ers under the Section 8 program and/or conventional public housing .
The former allow recipients to use subsi- dies to obtain market-rate private-sector apartments .
The latter offers subsidized accommodations in government- owned units .
There is sufficient devolution to the local level , how- ever , that , aligning with the definition of a “ street-level bureaucrat ” ( Lipsky 1980 ) , local offices and officials have discretion over policies they did not themselves design .
In order to encourage the creation of mixed-income hous- ing developments , the federal government dramatically increased public housing authorities ’ discretion with the passage of the 1998 Quality Housing and Work Respon- sibility Act .
This legislation permitted public housing of- ficials far greater authority in setting the rules for se- lecting tenants and Section 8 voucher recipients so long as they abided by federal fair housing guidelines ( Lazio 1998 ; Schwartz 2010 ; Vale 2000 ) .
By allowing for local autonomy and the proliferation of varying selection cri- teria , devolution creates a more complicated informa- tional environment .
This environment increases the im- portance of public housing authority officials in helping people navigate the application process .
Moreover , it of- fers street-level bureaucrats greater opportunities to ex- ercise individual authority and discretion ( Fording , Soss , and Schram 2007 ) .
While no one bureaucracy can possibly stand in as a representative for all , we believe that public housing officials represent a body of bureaucrats distinct from election officials who administer inherently political and less scarce programs .
Indeed , as nonpolitical social service providers , public housing officials likely share important characteristics with many counterparts administering so- cial programs in the Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) , for example .
While not necessarily in- dicative of local staffing , HUD and HHS have virtually identical agency prefere federal level ( Clinton and Lewis 2008 ) .
Thus , public housing bureaucrats permit us to test discrimination in a substantively different , and more broadly representative , context than those used in prior research .
Data and Methods We e-mailed public housing authorities at their publicly available e-mail addresses ( or online contact forms ) us- ing an audit study design .
Each housing authority re- ceived an e-mail on one of two days in the same week during 2014.4 We e-mailed all public housing authori- ties that could plausibly be matched with a core city in a metropolitan or micropolitan area ( n = 1,017 ) .
This was to ensure that the public housing authorities we se- lected could easily be matched with census demographic data ( many public housing authorities covered regions that would be difficult to match with census geocodes ) .
Our sample comprises an enormous range of places .
It 4The e-mails were sent on two separate days as a consequence of Google Mail batching limits .
104 KATHERINE LEVINE EINSTEIN AND DAVID M. GLICK includes communities with 10,000 residents alongside the largest cities in the country .
Each housing authority was randomly assigned ( via random number generator ) to receive an e-mail from one of six different accounts with putatively white , Hispanic , and black names ( Table SI1 in the supporting infor- mation shows balance in the average demographics for the communities assigned to each treatment ) .
For each racial/ethnic group , we chose one male and one female name to address any possible gender interactions emerg- ing from the disproportionately female-headed house- hold composition of public housing.5 Using male and female names reduces the number of observations for each treatment .
Nevertheless , we felt it was important to have both , given the prevalence of females in public hous- ing and the preponderance of analyses that use only male names in the audit study literature .
Below , we analyze the data with males and females separated and consolidated by race .
The six names were as follows : Brett Smith , Emily Smith ( white ) ; Tyrone Johnson , Shanice Johnson ( black ) ; and Santiago Martinez , Gabriela Martinez ( Hispanic ) .
For the white and black e-mailers , we chose names that were among the 20 most distinctively black and white names in Levitt and Dubner ( 2010 ) .
In a similar audit study published in a leading economics journal , Brett and Tyrone predicted their respective races at a rate of greater than 90 % ( Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004 ) .
Observa- tional data from California similarly bolster our choices of female names : 97 % of children named Shanice from 1989 to 2000 are black , and more than 98 % of their coun- terparts named Emily are white ( Fryer and Levitt 2004 ) .
Our selection of Hispanic names relied more heavily on the surname ( Martinez ) being distinctively Hispanic .
While the black and white surnames we used are rela- tively common among both racial groups ( Word et al .
2000 ) ,6 Martinez is strongly linked with Hispanic ethnic- ity .
Nearly 92 % of individuals with the surname Martinez are Hispanic ( Word et al .
2000 ) .
More generally , sur- name is reliably and widely used in both political science and other disciplines as a strong predictor of Hispanic ethnicity ( Barreto , Segura , and Woods 2004 ; Henderson , Sekhon , and Titiunik 2015 ; Wei et al .
2006 ) .
The U.S. Cen- sus Bureau provides a list of Spanish surnames ( including Martinez ) that correctly identifies 93.6 % of all Hispan- 5Roughly three-quarters of families in virtually all forms of pub- lic housing are female-headed households ( National Low Income Housing Coalition 2012 ) .
6Although Johnson appears at a slightly higher than expected rate among blacks ( 33.5 % ) , neither surname is meant to signal racial identity ; instead , we used widely validated first names for this purpose .
ics ; just as importantly , fewer than 5 % of those identified are false ( Barreto , Segura , and Woods 2004 ; Word and Perkins 1996 ) .
Combining Martinez with two first names drawn from an online list of the 100 most popular His- panic names ( BabyCenter en Espanol 2011 ) , these two names powerfully signal Hispanic ethnicity .
While we generally followed previous studies ’ prac- tices in selecting names , we made a couple of important adjustments .
We were , when possible , attentive to the age that names implied .
One name prominently used in a recent audit study—Deshawn—came into use almost exclusively after 1970 according to data from the Social Security Administration .
Thus , Butler and Broockman ’ s ( 2011 ) comparison of responses to e-mails from Deshawn and Jake—a name that has been in use with varying prominence since the turn of the 20th century ( Watten- berg 2005 ) —may actually be estimating the causal effect of being a young black male relative to being a white male of unclear age .
This could inflate the amount of mea- sured bias .
The age distributions for Tyrone and Brett largely overlap , with peaks in the 1960s and 1970s .
Sim- ilarly , Emily ’ s and Shanice ’ s distributions largely over- lap , with peaks in the 1980s.7 We were unable to match Hispanic names ’ age distributions with their black and white counterparts , however ; virtually all distinctively Hispanic names—including the two we chose , Santiago and Gabriela—peak in the 1990s and 2000s in Social Se- curity Administration data , likely due to recent trends in Hispanic migration .
Our e-mail text was the following : Hello , My name is X and I ’ m trying to figure out how to apply for public housing .
I believe I may be eligible .
Can you direct me to information about applying for public housing here ?
I also heard there might be a wait list for this program .
How long is it ?
Thanks , X We used a fairly generic request for “ public housing ” —rather than specifying a particular program— for several reasons .
First , we wanted to ensure that our e-mail would be equally applicable and reasonable at all of the public housing authorities in our sample .
Since there are significant variations in the scale and type of programs offered , we avoided incorporating particular programs in our query for help .
Second , we eschewed referencing specific programs because we did not want to 7While we ideally wanted to use “ older ” female names , analogous to Tyrone and Brett , none of the distinctively black female names rose to prominence until after the 1970s .
DOES RACE AFFECT ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT SERVICES ?
105 signal an overly sophisticated applicant .
Doing so could affect bureaucratic responsiveness in a variety of unin- tended ways .
Finally , we note that e-mail is not the only , or per- haps even primary , way that many reach out to housing authorities—though the same could be said for elected representatives , election officials , and others who have been audited via e-mail .
Nevertheless , our data suggest that many housing authorities are used to corresponding and connecting with potential residents online .
Fifty-five percent of the housing authorities we contacted either provided easily accessible e-mail addresses or “ contact us ” web forms .
In the other 45 % , we could not easily find e-mail contact directly from the housing authority .
In these instances , we used the e-mail contact informa- tion available via HUD ’ s website .
Importantly , these less web-friendly housing authorities were evenly distributed across the three racial/ethnic groups ( 43 % ( black ) , 45 % ( white ) , and 47 % ( Hispanic ) ) .
While these cases suggest that e-mailing a housing authority may not always be the best way to get information from it , even 49 % of our e- mails to the harder-to-find addresses received responses .
E-mailing even the less web-friendly housing authorities to seek information thus does not appear to be especially unusual .
To further document the web-friendliness of housing authorities , we took a random sample of 50 ( 5 % of our total sample ) and visited their websites to look for information targeted at potential applicants .
Sixty- six percent provided easily accessible information about things such as the application process , the status of waiting lists , eligibility criteria , or housing stock .
In some other cases , housing authorities did not have a discernible web presence .
In the statistical models below , we include a variable indicating whether we had to use the HUD web- site to find an e-mail address ( the Hard Email variable ) .
Ethical Considerations Our e-mail text more generally reflects important eth- ical considerations that are prominent and well dis- cussed in similar field experiments ( e.g. , Butler and Broockman 2011 ) .
First , we contacted government em- ployees in their professional capacity .
Second , our ex- perimental treatments were not designed to alter their behavior but rather to measure it .
Third , we were atten- tive to minimizing the amount of time workers devoted to requests for information from fictitious constituents .
We were especially attuned to this issue since one of us actu- ally worked in public housing prior to entering academia .
The “ can you direct me ” portion of the e-mail was de- signed to encourage housing officials to either send a link to a webpage or to copy and paste standard direc- tions .
The bulk of the e-mails we received do , in fact , fea- ture these sorts of responses .
The “ how long is [ the wait list ] ” query similarly elicited fast answers that required no more than a few words .
Moreover , we did not engage with housing officials at all after the first e-mail , even if our putative request for assistance was met with a follow- up question .
While some burden is necessary in order to gain insight into how bureaucrats allocate their finite time ( Hall 1996 ) , we believe that our minimal interven- tion did not substantially distract housing officials from serving their constituents .
Finally , we did use deception , consistent with all other prominent audit studies cited in this article .
This deception is necessary to experimen- tally test whether bureaucrats exhibit racial biases in their responses to constituents .
Without the random assign- ment of race and gender , we would be unable to measure this important quantity of interest .
We , of course , took anonymity very seriously , and all of our analyses reflect comparisons across groups of housing officials .
Key Variables We focus on two ways bias could manifest : ( 1 ) re- sponsiveness and ( 2 ) friendliness .
The former is di- rectly analogous to the main dependent variable in ex- isting racial bias research .
We calculate responsiveness rates and assess the timeliness and completeness of the responses .
Friendliness is a less widely used variable , and quan- tifying it is somewhat more challenging .
We use what we believe to be the most easily comparable ( and least sub- jective ) measure across e-mails : whether the e-mailer is addressed by proper name .
We were lenient in coding “ yes. ” A named salutation could be as casual as “ Hi Brett ” or as formal as “ Dear Ms. Martinez. ” 8 An ample literature in psychology and public opinion suggests that named salutations are surprisingly important to recipients .
In particular , they dramatically boost survey responses ( Heerwegh 2005 ; Joinson and Reips 2007 ) .
Moreover , this effect ( in some studies ) is stronger when the sender is seen as powerful ( Joinson and Reips 2007 ) , as may be the case for housing officials e-mailing public housing applicants .
There are many potential mechanisms at play here .
Per- haps most prominently , a wide array of psychological research reveals that individuals have a powerful affinity 8This measure is somewhat analogous to that featured in White , Nathan , and Faller ( 2015 ) .
They code friendliness using both salu- tation by proper name and the use of “ explicitly friendly language ” like “ Let us know if you have any more questions. ” We viewed the “ explicitly friendly language ” as somewhat more challenging to accurately code , and thus limited ourselves to the more clear-cut proper name salutation .
106 KATHERINE LEVINE EINSTEIN AND DAVID M. GLICK for their own name .
This manifests in ways such as more carefully examining resumes and advertised brands with names similar to one ’ s own ( Howard and Kerin 2011 ) .
We anticipate that named salutations , then , may lead an applicant to feel more warmly and better served .
In ad- dition , a named salutation might also signal the effort a caseworker will put forward in helping a client through the housing application process .
Because we do not fol- low up on our initial e-mail correspondence , though , we can not measure the ensuing interactions .
To evaluate Hypothesis 2 , we need information about workers ’ demographics .
Unfortunately , public housing authorities do not publish data on the racial and ethnic breakdowns of their staffs .
Thus , we attempt to at least roughly assess Hypothesis 2 by incorporating , when pos- sible , the ethnicity of the housing authority official who responds to the e-mail .
We do so by coding Hispanic eth- nicity based on the responding official ’ s e-mail address name .
Note that we are only measuring whether the re- sponding housing official is Hispanic or not .
In an ideal world , we would use the responder ’ s name to classify him or her as black or white in order to better correspond with our treatment groups .
As above , while ethnically distinc- tive surnames are reliable and widely used predictors of Hispanic ethnicity , there are no census lists of black and white surnames that provide anywhere near the same ac- curacy that the Hispanic surname list does ( Henderson , Sekhon , and Titiunik 2015 ) .
We are also only capturing the ethnicity of those indi- viduals who actually respond to our e-mails .
Information about those who received e-mail requests but did not reply is unfortunately unavailable due to the nature of housing authority e-mail addresses , which rarely feature an indi- vidual ’ s name .
Instead , they are typically a generic address like “ citynamepublichousing @ cityname.org. ” Responses then typically come from an individual ’ s named account .
Thus , we can evaluate Hypothesis 2 only for those obser- vations for which we received e-mail responses .
Since the treatments were randomly assigned , in expectation , our e-mails should have reached Hispanic officials at equal rates in each condition , allowing us to compare those that were returned .
If a disproportionate number of Hispanic officials received the e-mails in the Hispanic conditions due to random chance , it would undermine these infer- ences .
While we can not know who the e-mails reached , we do know that the average Hispanic populations in the communities were similar across the three racial treat- ment groups ( 14.0 % in the white group , 14.5 % in the black group , and 13.8 % in the Hispanic group ) .
Lastly , we note that this issue applies to only part of our Hypothesis 2 analysis—the portion exploring bias in responsiveness— and not the rest of the results for Hypothesis 2 or our other hypotheses .
To evaluate Hypothesis 3—which postulated that bu- reaucrats in communities with more black and Hispanic residents would be more responsive to black and Hispanic constituents , respectively—we include community racial demographics .
We obtain the proportion white , black,9 and Hispanic at the “ place ” level from the American Com- munity Survey ’ s 2012 5-year estimates .
In addition , we in- corporate other relevant demographic controls from the census into our statistical models : city poverty rate and population .
The poverty rate is likely related to the de- mand for housing and the overall number of inquiries to which a bureaucrat must respond .
Similarly , larger cities may have more professional housing authorities or more resources along with different public housing applicant pools , for example .
Results We begin by evaluating Hypothesis 1 and testing whether the race of the inquirer affects whether housing officials are more likely to respond and the speed and compre- hensiveness of their responses .
In Figure 1 , we report the raw and unmodeled data—the proportion of inquiries that received e-mail responses ( with 95 % confidence in- tervals ) .
On the left , we separate out all six conditions ( e.g. , white male [ Brett ] ) .
On the right , we consolidate by race .
Overall , we do not find strong evidence of differ- ent responsiveness by race or gender ( 2 ( 5 ) = 5.92 , pr = .31 for the six treatment category tabulation ) .
The range across the six conditions is a mere 10 percentage points , from a low of 53 % to a high of 63 % .
Given the theoretical emphasis on discrimination against minorities , we primarily care about comparisons between whites and blacks and whites and Hispanics .
The former comparison offers findings contrary to those in other studies .
Our findings do not merely fail to find significant evidence of discrimination due to insufficient statistical power .
To the extent we do get variation , it is in a direction counter to other findings of discrimina- tion against blacks .
Blacks actually received the highest response rates : 60.7 % versus 57.5 % for whites ( p = .41 ) .
Even comparing the extreme ends of the white and black 95 % confidence intervals yields a maximum plausible discrimination of only 8 percentage points .
The evidence concerning Hispanics is more mixed .
It does not offer especially strong support for or against the discrimination hypothesis .
The two Hispanic 9We calculate the proportion non-Hispanic white and black .
DOES RACE AFFECT ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT SERVICES ?
107 FIGURE 1 Proportion of Inquiries That Received a Response By race/ethnicity crossed with sex Tyrone Shanice Santiago Gabriela Brett Emily 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 P ro po rti on G et tin g a R es po ns e Treatment Group By race/ethnicity ( collapsed by sex ) Black Hispanic White 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 P ro po rt io n G et tin g a R es po ns e Treatment Group treatment conditions did receive the two lowest response rates .
The difference between whites and Hispanics is 4.8 percentage points ( p = .11 ) .
On the one hand , attribut- ing systematic discrimination on the basis of this fairly small and borderline significant ( with a one-tailed test ) difference would constitute overly extrapolating from the given data .
On the other hand , the Hispanic find- ings do not provide the evidence against the discrimina- tion hypothesis that the black name results do .
In fact , the substantively small magnitude we find is similar to the anti-Hispanic responsiveness difference uncovered in White , Nathan , and Faller ( 2015 ) with more observa- tions ( and thus smaller standard errors ) .
This could be taken as evidence bolstering the conclusion of discrim- ination against Hispanics .
It could also be taken as evi- dence that responsiveness bias against Hispanics is very small in magnitude and is only significant when the Ns are sufficiently large .
Importantly , having all three racial groups in our study allows us to compare antiblack to anti-Hispanic discrimination .
This comparison , as we discuss later , shows that the two types of antiminority discrimination are not the same and may derive from ( or get reduced by ) different mechanisms .
The difference be- tween blacks and Hispanics is about 8 percentage points ( p = .02 ) .
We utilize multiple logit model specifications to test for effects more rigorously .
In Table 1 , we depict the effects of race on our dependent variables of interest .
Here , in accordance with our theoretical predictions , we consolidate the treatments by race/ethnicity ( males and females together ) .
These models include control variables that may be associated with responsiveness : percent black and percent Hispanic in the community , poverty rate ( re- lated to the demand for housing and perhaps the number of inquiries ) , population ( logged ) , and a variable that indicates that a housing authority ’ s online contact ad- dress was difficult to obtain ( Hard Email ) .
Similar mod- els that do not consolidate the treatments by race pro- duce very similar results ( see Table SI2 in the supporting information ) .
The model in the first column reports the results us- ing the responsiveness variable .
Contrary to Hypothesis 1 , it provides little to no evidence of racial discrimination .
It does show less responsiveness in poorer areas ( perhaps they have less housing available or bureaucratic capac- ity to respond ) .
It also shows less responsiveness from housing authorities that did not provide easily accessible electronic contact information .
While these variations are worthy of further exploration , the main implications con- cern race .
Our failure to reject the null is not the same as demonstrating no effect .
Nonetheless , we believe these results in conjunction with the next set of findings on response speed are strongly suggestive of an absence of racial discrimination .
The likelihood ratio test comparing Model 1 to the same model without the race indicators is insignificant ( 2 = 4.49 , p = .106 ) .
As with the summary statistics , this model provides some suggestive evidence of small anti-Hispanic bias , but none that reaches con- ventional significance levels.10 10We note that the main results of all three models in Table 1 are unchanged ( except for the Hard Email control variable becom- ing insignifiant in Model 3 ) when including the HUD assessment scores that we discuss below as a proxy for a housing authority ’ s professionalism and capacity .
( Because these scores are only avail- able for about two-thirds of the housing authorities , we do not include them in the models we report ) .
108 KATHERINE LEVINE EINSTEIN AND DAVID M. GLICK TABLE 1 Logit models for the three Dependent Variables , with All Three Racial Groups and Other Demographic Controls Variables ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 1 ) Response in Proper Name Response 24 Hours Greeting Black Name 0.13 0.29 −0.21 ( 0.17 ) ( 0.26 ) ( 0.22 ) Hispanic Name −0.21 0.10 −0.82∗∗ ( 0.16 ) ( 0.25 ) ( 0.22 ) Percent Black −0.31 −0.17 0.71 ( 0.52 ) ( 0.87 ) ( 0.74 ) Percent Hispanic −0.32 −0.92 1.33∗ ( 0.43 ) ( 0.69 ) ( 0.63 ) Poverty Rate −1.65 1.28 −.93 ( 1.21 ) ( 2.00 ) ( 1.71 ) Log Population 0.13 −0.01 −0.04 ( 0.07 ) ( 0.10 ) ( 0.09 ) Hard Email −.46∗∗ −0.14 −0.42∗ ( 0.14 ) ( 0.22 ) ( 0.19 ) Constant −0.50 1.33 0.88 ( 0.75 ) ( 1.16 ) ( 0.99 ) Observations 978 551 549 Log Likelihood −650.7 −286.8 −367.5 Note : Standard errors in parentheses .
Base category is white .
De- mographic variables from 2012 American Community Survey .
∗∗p < .01 , ∗p < .05 .
Finally , we address the possibility that aggregate bal- ance is masking offsetting preferential treatment ( an is- sue that becomes even more important in our discus- sion of representative bureaucracy below ) .
Butler and Broockman ( 2011 ) find that among Democrats , black state legislators are more likely to reply to black con- stituent requests than to their white counterparts .
One way to roughly estimate the underlying distribution of housing officials is to assume they are drawn from the populations in which the housing authorities are located .
The average community in our sample is 66.5 % white , 13.5 % black , and 14.5 % Hispanic .
Thus , even if blacks ( or Hispanics ) are disproportionately represented in gov- ernment jobs ( about 19 % of blacks , 14 % of whites , and 10 % of Hispanics work in the public sector ; Department of Labor , 2012a , 2012b ) , it is very unlikely they are over- represented enough to account for the overall balance we observe .
To supplement these findings , we considered two other indicators of responsiveness .
First , we assessed speed by checking whether those who did respond did so within 24 hours ( essentially by the end of the next working day , given the timing of our e-mails . )
We con- ducted all of the same analyses as we did with the basic responsiveness dependent variable ( see Figure SI1 and Table SI3 in the supporting information and Model 2 in Table 1 ) .
These results largely mirror those above .
In fact , they offer even less evidence of discrimination , mainly because the suggestive anti-Hispanic bias disap- pears .
Brett , the white male , actually obtained the lowest 24-hour response percentage and had the highest median response time .
Finally , responsiveness bias might manifest in the quality of information received .
Only 48 % of re- sponses included wait list times—a query we included in the e-mails .
Of Hispanics who obtained a response , 43 % received information about wait list times , compared to 50 % for blacks and 49 % for whites .
These results fall well short of conventional levels of statistical significance ( p = .427 , 2 test ) .
Evidence of Discrimination : Tone We also postulated that racial bias might manifest in offi- cials ’ friendliness when they do respond .
Using salutation by proper name as our measure of tone ( see above ) , we report the proportion of responses that began with a per- sonalized greeting in Figure 2 by the six treatments and three racial groups .
Here , we do see evidence of racial bias , but only against Hispanics .
Sixty-one percent of the messages to the white e-mailers began with a named salutation .
Only 41 % to Hispanics did .
This difference is highly signifi- cant ( p = .000 ) .
Only 37 % of responses to Santiago began with a named salutation , compared with over 60 % for Tyrone , Brett , and Emily .
The model we report in the text , in the third column of Table 1 , further demonstrates the negative impact a Hispanic name has on receiving a named greeting .
The Hispanic name indicator variable is substantial , nega- tive , and highly significant .
Substantively , the change in the predicted probability of getting a named salutation as a function of changing from a white name to a His- panic one ( with other variables held at their means ) is –20.0 percentage points , with 95 % confidence interval [ −30.5 , −10.0 ] .
Moreover , the percent Hispanic variable is positive and significant , suggesting that named greet- ings , perhaps especially for Hispanics , are more likely in areas with higher Hispanic populations .
( Similar mod- els that include all six treatments separately [ Table SI4 ] bolster these results . )
These results differ from those in White , Nathan , and Faller ( 2015 ) , as they find discrimina- tion in responsiveness but not tone .
Part of this variation DOES RACE AFFECT ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT SERVICES ?
109 FIGURE 2 Proportion of Responses That Begin with a Personalized Greeting By race/ethnicity crossed with sex Tyrone Shanice Santiago Gabriela Brett Emily 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 P ro po rti on G et tin g a R es po ns e U si ng a P ro pe r N am e Treatment Group By race/ethnicity ( collapsed by sex ) Black Hispanic White 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 P ro po rt io n G et tin g a R es po ns e U si ng a P ro pe r N am e Treatment Group in results , though , may be attributable to slight differences in how friendliness in tone was coded.11 Community and Officials ’ Demographics Representative bureaucracy , contact theory , and familiar- ity bias may explain some of the variation between our results and findings of bias in other settings .
We thus as- sess the interaction of the race of the putative constituent and ( 1 ) the demographics of public housing officials and ( 2 ) the traits of the community in which she is applying .
Because we were only able to determine a hous- ing official ’ s ethnicity when he or she responded to our e-mails , we can not observe the denominator .
We can only estimate responsiveness by assuming that randomization balanced the odds of an e-mail arriving on the screen of a Hispanic official in the first place .
Doing so suggests that responsiveness is not driven by officials favoring respon- dents of their own race .
Of all of the responses for whites , blacks , and Hispanics , 6.2 % , 6.1 % , and 9.0 % respectively came from ostensibly Hispanic officials ( p = .453 ) .
Sim- ilarly , conditional on replying , Hispanic officials are not more likely to respond in 24 hours to Hispanic appli- cants ( white : 81.8 % , black : 83.2 % , Hispanic : 88.2 % ; p = .88 ) .
Again , there is little evidence to support the conclu- sion that Hispanic e-mailers did appreciably better when interacting with Hispanic housing officials .
In Figure 3 , we show the proportion of friendly re- sponses coming from Hispanic officials .
We find that 11As above , we also did this analysis coding all nonresponses as unfriendly responses to address the truncation problem .
This does not affect the results .
FIGURE 3 Proportion of Responses from Hispanic Housing Officials That Begin with a Personalized Greeting Black Hispanic White 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 P ro po rt io n G et tin g a R es po ns e U si ng a P ro pe r N am e Treatment Group Hispanic officials were no more likely than their non- Hispanic counterparts to address Hispanic constituents by name .
Forty-seven percent of responses from His- panic housing officials addressed Hispanic constituent re- quests by name , compared with 40 % from non-Hispanic housing officials—a difference that was not statistically significant in our sample .
Furthermore , the lower rate at which Hispanics receive named greetings ( displayed in Figure 2 ) appears to hold even when we only look at responses from Hispanic housing officials .
Though the results are no longer statistically significant due to large standard errors , Hispanics continue to receive the 110 KATHERINE LEVINE EINSTEIN AND DAVID M. GLICK lowest share of named greetings , even when the hous- ing official responding to their request is also Hispanic.12 Thus , our admittedly crude efforts to test Hypothesis 2 ( representative bureaucracy ) suggest that it is an unlikely candidate to explain why we did not find the same re- sponsiveness bias against minorities that other scholars have .
These results come with important caveats though .
The cell sizes are small .
More importantly , we are unable to test for analogous effects for black and white housing officials .
The effects of community traits do provide some sup- port for Hypothesis 3 .
The first way we move beyond average effects is to create variables capturing whether each housing authority is in a community that is in the top , middle , or bottom third of the distribution for black population and for Hispanic population .
Because these distributions are so skewed , the top thirds for black and Hispanic percentages start at around 12 % black and His- panic , respectively .
Communities in the bottom thirds have essentially no black or Hispanic residents .
We chose to convert continuous demographic variables into cate- gorical ones both to reduce the impact of places with 80 % or 90 % black ( or Hispanic ) populations and because the theoretical questions are better thought of in terms of high or low populations rather than ones about the marginal effect of a one-unit increase in the population of a minor- ity group .
We analyze the effects of these 1/3 variables by split- ting our sample into the three racial/ethnic treatment groups and estimating separate models .
We report the results of these logit models for the responsiveness and friendliness dependent variables in the supporting infor- mation ( Tables SI5 and SI6 ) .
These models include con- trols for city population ( logged ) , poverty rate , and our “ hard email ” indicator .
The main effects of interest are the 1/3 variables .
To focus on substantive effects , in Fig- ure 4 , we plotted the predicted change in the probability of getting ( 1 ) a response and ( 2 ) a named greeting .
Here , the point estimates capture the effects of moving from a lowest-third population ( black/Hispanic ) community to a top-third community , with all other variables held at their means .
For example , the very first point depicts the extent to which e-mailing a housing authority in a high- black population community changes the probability of a white e-mailer obtaining a response relative to one in a low-black community .
12This finding helps us to rule out the possibility that officials are not responding to Hispanics by name because of a lack of famil- iarity with Hispanic names .
Indeed , were this the case , we would expect Hispanic officials to address putative Hispanic constituents by name at higher rates .
The left panel in Figure 4 shows that the overall non- bias in responsiveness findings we reported earlier does not vary in important ways with community demograph- ics .
Whites ’ , blacks ’ , and Hispanics ’ likelihoods of receiving responses are always similar irrespective of whether they are e-mailing in a community in which they are a relatively large or small fraction of the population .
This means that the aggregate results are not masking extremely high re- sponsiveness in black communities and discrimination in others , for example .
These null results are robust to using other population cut points ( top versus bottom 1/4s and 1/5s instead of 1/3s ) .
The named salutation models ( right panel ) do offer some suggestive evidence that a community ’ s population affects the likelihood that blacks and Hispanics receive friendlier responses .
Black names may be less likely ( just outside the p = .1 level ) to receive a named greeting in a high-Hispanic area .
Hispanic names , on the other hand , may be more likely ( p = .08 ) to receive friendly responses in areas in the top third of the Hispanic population dis- tribution compared to those in the lowest third .
While we report the more conservative ( and insignificant ) results in which we split community racial demographics into thirds , the Hispanic results increase in magnitude and significance when comparing the top 1/4 to the bottom 1/4 ( p = .06 ) and the top 1/5 to the bottom 1/5 ( p = .01 ) of the percent Hispanic distributions .
To conclude our analysis , we zero in on substan- tively and theoretically interesting permutations of racial demographics .
Now , we create variables to distinguish four special types of communities : “ high white ” ( top 1/3 white , bottom 1/3 black , bottom 1/3 Hispanic ) , “ high black ” ( top 1/3 black , bottom 1/3 white , bottom 1/3 His- panic ) , “ high Hispanic ” ( top 1/3 Hispanic , bottom 1/3 white , bottom 1/3 black ) , and “ high black and Hispanic ” ( top 1/3 black , top 1/3 Hispanic , bottom 1/3 white ) .
Fo- cusing on these permutations directly speaks to ques- tions of how responsiveness varies in communities that are dominated by one group , and whether racial minori- ties do better or worse depending on whether they are concentrated ( alongside other nonwhites ) in a commu- nity , or whether they are the primary minority group .
All communities in the data that do not fit into one of these four categories are lumped together in the base- line .
As before , we report the full model results ( again splitting the sample by e-mailer race ) in the supporting information ( Tables SI7 and SI8 ) .
We plot substantive effects of interest in Figure 5 .
Here , the point estimates capture the differences in the predicted probability of get- ting a response ( or named greeting ) as a consequence of moving from one community type to another .
For white names , the main question of interest—as articulated in DOES RACE AFFECT ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT SERVICES ?
111 FIGURE 4 Change in Predicted Probability of Getting a Response and Getting a Named Greeting as a Function of Moving from a Community in the Lowest Third of Percent Black/Hispanic to Moving to One in the Highest Third Note : Estimates based on models described in the text and reported in Tables SI5 and SI6 in the supporting information .
FIGURE 5 Change in Predicted Probability of Moving from a Town of Type X to a Town of Type Y Note : Demographic variables from 2012 American Community Survey .
Town type indicated by x-axis labels .
Mainly White = top 1/3 in white population , bottom 1/3 in black and Hispanic ; High Black ( Hispanic ) = top 1/3 black ( Hispanic ) population , bottom 1/3 white and Hispanic ( black ) ; High Black and Hispanic = top 1/3 black and top 1/3 Hispanic population .
Probabilities are outputs from the models in Tables SI7 and SI8 in the supporting information .
Hypothesis 3—is responsiveness in very white areas com- pared to highly diverse ones .
For blacks ( and Hispanics ) , three comparisons are theoretically important : ( 1 ) the dif- ference between a very white community and a very black ( or Hispanic ) one ( one ’ s own group is disproportionately represented ) , ( 2 ) the difference between a very white area and a very black and Hispanic one ( minorities , including , but not exclusively , one ’ s own group , are disproportion- ately represented ) , and ( 3 ) the difference between a very Hispanic and a very black area ( one ’ s own group versus a different minority group ) .
This analysis again shows little variation in basic re- sponse rates .
Consistent with Hypothesis 3 , it provides some suggestive evidence , as above , that Hispanics obtain 112 KATHERINE LEVINE EINSTEIN AND DAVID M. GLICK fewer unfriendly/formal responses in higher minority ar- eas than they do elsewhere .
Notably , the largest ( and only significant effect at the .05 level ) is the difference between mainly white and high minority ( Hispanic and black ) areas for named responses to the e-mails from Hispan- ics .
This suggests that the underlying mechanism is more about day-to-day exposure to minorities in the commu- nity than to differential treatment by group .
Hispanics do not do appreciably better in high Hispanic areas than they do in high black areas .
As before , the effects are similarly signed and more significant ( p < .05 ) when substituting a 1/4 cut point that compares more extreme places to each other .
Discussion Our findings offer a mixed and nuanced portrait of dis- crimination , and its absence , in bureaucratic responsive- ness .
We find some support for the bias against minorities hypothesis ( Hypothesis 1 ) in the context of e-mail tone .
Our further exploration of Hypotheses 2 and 3 , how- ever , suggests little support for Hypothesis 2 .
Hispanic housing officials did not provide more friendly responses to Hispanics ’ constituent service requests than they did to others ’ .
We are cautious in extrapolating too much from these results , however , given our inability to test Hypothesis 2 for white and black bureaucrats .
Finally , we do find modest and suggestive support for Hypothesis 3 in the context of Hispanic e-mail tone .
Perhaps the most striking feature of our analysis—in contrast with a wealth of audit studies—is the absence of antiblack discrimination .
Below , we discuss several possi- ble systematic explanations for this important main dif- ference .
Before delving into these more substantively in- teresting possibilities , we address whether the key results may actually be a consequence of class signaling in our de- sign .
Perhaps the polished ( though informal ) English in our e-mails suggested a high socioeconomic status appli- cant and muted potential discrimination .
Bertrand and Mullainathan ’ s ( 2004 ) seminal experimental study pro- vides helpful evidence to counter this concern .
They find that higher social class does not mitigate antiblack labor discrimination .
Similarly , using a telephone audit to study housing discrimination , Massey and Lundy ( 2001 ) find that racial discrimination persists regardless of class cues , though lower-class status does exacerbate antiblack dis- crimination .
On balance , prior scholarship suggests that sending a favorable class cue is unlikely to have induced a null black discrimination result .
Moreover , it is possible that these findings are largely a confirmation of the racial classification model ( Schram et al .
2009 ; Soss , Fording , and Schram 2008 ) .
In the ab- sence of discrediting information about minority clients , caseworkers may have been disinclined to engage in overt discrimination .
The fact that we do find evidence of discrimination—in friendliness toward Hispanics— despite the absence of discrediting information in that treatment condition makes this possibility less likely .
Blacks , Familiarity Bias , and Representative Bureaucracy Demographic data from the National Low Income Hous- ing Coalition ( 2012 ) and the American Community Survey ( United States Census Bureau 2013 ) reveal that blacks are significantly overrepresented in America ’ s public housing .
While blacks compose just over 10 % of the total population , and under 20 % of total renters , they represent over 40 % of public housing residents and voucher recipients .
Whites , conversely , are significantly underrepresented , and Hispanics are proportionately rep- resented .
It could be , then , that the absence of discrim- ination against blacks is a consequence of housing au- thority officials ’ disproportionate familiarity with black constituents in the public housing context .
Because we are sampling at the housing authority level , however , we suspect that this mechanism may contribute to , but not completely explain , our results .
America ’ s racial geography suggests that the overrepresentation of blacks in public housing is likely most stark in large cities .
However , each large city is only one observation in our study .
Consequently , the bottom third of our distribution of housing authorities comes from communities with es- sentially zero black residents .
Thus , it is unlikely that the bulk of our housing authorities are disproportionately accustomed to black clients .
Nevertheless , it is possi- ble that these mechanisms affect bigger cities and help explain why the population variable often had a positive effect on responsiveness to blacks , even when controlling for overall black population rates ( e.g. , Table SI5 ) .
Racial Coding of Poverty A second , and related , potential explanation stems from research by Gilens ( 1999 ) .
This line of scholar- ship contends that , courtesy of the disproportionate use of images of blacks in negative stories about poverty , Americans largely oppose redistributive welfare initiatives because they associate blacks with the undeserving poor .
It could be that , as a consequence of their jobs , housing authority employees are more likely to have had personal DOES RACE AFFECT ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT SERVICES ?
113 encounters with poor blacks and whites alike .
Therefore , they are not receiving biased information about the racial composition of the poor from the media .
Instead , their views of race and the deserving or undeserving poor may be based on their direct experience .
Applying Gilens ’ s theory of mass attitudes about welfare to public housing officials offers a potential explanation for our findings .
Experience working directly with the poor may dimin- ish the racial coding of poverty , or lead to a different one , which could in turn curb the discriminatory impulses that manifest in other populations with different perceptions of the connections between race and poverty .
Fair Housing Legislation Finally , in their research on voting officials , White , Nathan , and Faller ( 2015 ) find lower levels of discrim- ination in locales that were covered by the Voting Rights Act ( VRA ) .
They cite research from Pager and Shepherd ( 2008 ) suggesting that organizational awareness , moni- toring , and procedures can make potential discriminators cognizant of and reduce the risk of bias .
Much of what public housing administrators do is governed extensively by the Fair Housing Act .
Moreover , because of the Fair Housing Act , the Department of Housing and Urban De- velopment makes an effort to regularly measure private market housing discrimination with frequent audit stud- ies centered on residential steering and other forms of discriminatory behavior ( Turner et al .
2002 , 2013 ) .
Hous- ing bureaucrats may therefore be highly knowledgeable about the potential for discrimination and about the pro- cedures the federal government employs to mitigate it .
This could make housing officials—like voting officials in VRA-regulated locales—less apt to discriminate .
The Fair Housing Act emerged in 1968 in the context of national concern about black poverty and residential segregation .
It may thus raise awareness about antiblack , but not anti- Hispanic , discrimination .
As with the Voting Rights Act , the Fair Housing Act is not randomly assigned to par- ticular bureaucracies or locations , so we can not assess its causal impact .
Nonetheless , the absence of discrimination against blacks in particular suggests at least some efficacy in addressing housing discrimination .
It may even point , especially in conjunction with the Voting Rights Act find- ings , to more broadly applicable interventions for reduc- ing discrimination in other areas and suggest why housing bureaucracies differ from other contexts in which we do observe discrimination .
It is also plausible that the prominence of the Fair Housing Act made respondents suspicious that they were being studied by academics or the government .
While we can not disprove this possibility , we believe that several pieces of evidence suggest that it is unlikely .
First , while discrimination in the private housing market has been extensively studied ( and audited ) , public housing author- ities themselves have , to our knowledge , never been au- dited .
Second , many of the responses we received seemed genuine and informal in nature—not the sorts of replies you would anticipate from a bureaucrat aware she was being audited .
Here is a sampling of some of these replies : “ How old are you ? ” “ If you would like to contact my of- fice , I would explain it to you better .
My office number is [ office phone number ] ” “ [ Housing authority website ] has all the info u need. ” Third , the presence of an anti- Hispanic bias in friendliness further indicates that our experiment participants were unaware of our study ; we should expect no bias to manifest if respondents were aware of the audit .
Bureaucratic Professionalism The discussion of the Fair Housing Act prompts a broader , related question : Does bureaucratic professionalism more generally mitigate discrimination ?
Variations in bureau- cratic professionalism can not explain our article ’ s experi- mental nonresults on responsiveness ; the randomization in design ensures that differences ( or non differences ) in responsiveness across places are not driven by jurisdic- tional characteristics .
However , heterogeneity in discrim- ination by bureaucratic professionalism might point to interesting policy prescriptions for mitigating racial bias .
Highly professional bureaucracies may be better at ensur- ing that they reply to outreach .
They may also be more sensitive to issues of discrimination in housing in general and may be more likely to prevent differential treatment .
To assess this possibility , we use the Public Housing As- sessment Scores ( PHAS ) that the Department of Housing and Urban Development assigns to each housing author- ity .
HUD calculates these scores based on four compo- nents : ( 1 ) physical inspection , ( 2 ) financial assessment , ( 3 ) management operations , and ( 4 ) use of the Capital Fund ( a source of housing authority funding that can be used for a variety of operations ) .
HUD collects the data that compose these ratings through self-reports and au- dits ( Department of Housing and Urban Development 2015b ) .
We split the sample by HUD assessment scores.13 The median assessment score in our sample was 89 out of 100 .
This actually corresponded to the cut point be- tween “ high performers ” and others in the qualitative 13Not all housing authorities had assessment scores available ( n = 671 for all analyses ) .
114 KATHERINE LEVINE EINSTEIN AND DAVID M. GLICK designations that accompany the numerical scores .
The data suggest that professionalism is positively associated with responsiveness to both whites ( 19 percentage point difference between high performers and others , p = .01 ) and blacks ( 16 percentage point difference , p = .02 ) , but not Hispanics ( difference of less than 1 percentage point ) .
In these housing authorities , the black response rates ex- ceed those of Hispanics by a whopping 15 percentage points ( p = .024 ) .
Conversely , whites , blacks , and His- panics all obtain about the same response rates from the lower-performing housing authorities .
While these gen- eral trends hold when we use different cut points , the stark black and Hispanic patterns soften .
Thus , we can not draw any strong conclusions .
Conclusion By comparing bias toward blacks and Hispanics—a juxta- position most studies eschew to preserve power ( though see Schram et al .
2009 ) —we are able to uncover a pre- viously unspecified type of bureaucratic bias that im- pacts one group ( Hispanics ) but not the other .
Indeed , our findings suggest that Hispanics are marginally less likely to receive responses from housing bureaucrats , and , when they do receive responses , they are far less likely to be friendly ones .
Furthermore , our results likely repre- sent a lower bound on discrimination against Hispanic constituents .
In our study , putative Hispanic constituents are sending e-mails with polished grammar , which may provide counter-stereotypical cues to caseworkers .
This anti-Hispanic bias has important policy implications .
In her in-depth exploration of local bureaucracies , Marrow ( 2011 ) found that these organizations—including schools and social service organizations—play a critical role in in- corporating ( or failing to incorporate ) new Hispanic im- migrants .
Unfriendliness toward Hispanics seeking pub- lic housing , a low-income population that likely already feels stigmatized , has the potential to be quite alienat- ing .
These types of interactions with government agen- cies could harm prospects for broader political and social incorporation .
Moreover , our findings reveal that we may observe different discriminatory biases depending upon the po- litical and economic arena .
This does not necessarily mean that researchers and policy makers should take our arti- cle as evidence that discrimination is more limited than previously feared , but it should at least serve as a check against overgeneralizing from the excellent existing work that does find discrimination .
At a minimum , our find- ings suggest that bureaucratic discrimination may be con- tingent on the demographics of the place in which a bu- reaucracy is situated .
More generally , we suspect that the level of bias depends on the structure of the bureaucracy .
A future research agenda that compares different bureau- cracies , and bureaucratic oversight , might help scholars and policy makers identify policy solutions to the long- thorny problem of racial discrimination in the public and private sectors .
References Allport , Gordon W. 1954 .
The Nature of Prejudice .
Reading , MA : Addison-Wesley .
Arceneaux , Kevin , and Daniel M. Butler .
2016 .
“ How Not to Increase Participation in Local Government : The Advantages of Experiments When Testing Policy Interventions. ” Public Administration Review 76 ( 1 ) : 131–139 .
Ayres , Ian , and Peter Siegelman .
1995 .
“ Race and Gender Dis- crimination in Bargaining for a New Car. ” American Eco- nomic Review 85 ( 3 ) : 304–21 .
BabyCenter en Espanol .
2011 .
“ 100 Most Popular Hispanic Baby Names of 2011. ” http : //www.babycenter.com/0_100-most- popular-hispanic-baby-names-of-2011_10363639.bc .
Barreto , Matthew A. , Gary M. Segura , and Nathan D. Woods .
2004 .
“ The Mobilizing Effect of Majority-Minority Districts on Latino Turnout. ” American Political Science Review 98 ( 1 ) : 65–75 .
Bertrand , Marianne , and Sendhil Mullainathan .
2004 .
“ Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal ?
A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimina- tion. ” American Economic Review 94 ( 4 ) : 991–1013 .
Bobo , Lawrence .
2001 .
“ Racial Attitudes and Relations at the Close of the Twentieth Century. ” In America Becoming : Racial Trends and Their Consequences , ed .
Neil J. Smelser , William Julius Wilson , and Faith Mitchell .
Washington , DC : National Academy Press , 264–301 .
Bowean , Lolly .
2014 .
“ Chicago Housing Authority Opens Wait Lists for Public Housing Vouchers. ” http : //www .
chicagotribune.com/news/ct-cha-waiting-list-met-1028- 20141027-story.html .
Bradbury , Mark , and J. Edward Kellough .
2011 .
“ Representa- tive Bureaucracy : Assessing the Evidence on Active Repre- sentation. ” American Review of Public Administration 2 ( 2 ) : 157–67 .
Brodkin , Evelyn Z .
1997 .
“ Inside the Welfare Contract : Discre- tion and Accountability in State Welfare Administration. ” Social Service Review 71 ( 1 ) : 1–33 .
Butler , Daniel M. , and David E. Broockman .
2011 .
“ Do Politi- cians Racially Discriminate Against Constituents ?
A Field Experiment on State Legislators. ” American Journal of Polit- ical Science 55 ( 3 ) : 463–477 .
Clinton , Joshua D. , and David E. Lewis .
2008 .
“ Expert Opinion , Agency Characteristics , and Agency Preferences. ” Political Analysis 16 ( 1 ) : 3–20 .
Coleman , Sally , Jeffrey L. Brudney , and J. Edward Kellough .
1998 .
“ Bureaucracy as a Representative Institution : Toward a Reconciliation of Bureaucratic Government and Democratic Theory. ” American Journal of Political Science 42 ( 3 ) : 717–44 .
DOES RACE AFFECT ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT SERVICES ?
115 Davis , Belinda Creel , Michelle Livermore , and Younghee Lim .
2011 .
“ The Extended Reach of Minority Political Power : The Interaction of Descriptive Representation , Managerial Networking , and Race. ” Journal of Politics 73 ( 2 ) : 494–507 .
Department of Housing and Urban Development .
2015a .
“ HUD ’ s Public Housing Program. ” http : //portal.hud .
gov/hudportal/HUD ? src=/topics/rental_assistance/phprog .
Department of Housing and Urban Development .
2015b .
“ Integrated Assessment Subsystem—Public Housing Assessment System ( NASS-PHAS ) . ” http : //portal.hud.gov/ hudportal/HUD ? src=/program_offices/public_indian_ housing/reac/products/prodphasintrule .
Department of Labor .
2012a .
“ The African-American Labor in the Recovery. ” http : //www.dol.gov/_sec/media/reports/ BlackLaborForce/BlackLaborForce.pdf .
Department of Labor .
2012b .
“ The Latino Labor Force at a Glance. ” http : //www.dol.gov/_sec/media/reports/ HispanicLaborForce/HispanicLaborForce.pdf .
Doleac , Jennifer L. , and Luke C. D. Stein .
2013 .
“ The Visible Hand : Race and Online Market Outcomes. ” Economic Jour- nal 2013 : F469–92 .
Epp , Charles R. , Steven Maynard-Moody , and Donald P. Haider-Markel .
2013 .
Pulled Over : How Police Stops Define Race and Citizenship .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press .
Ernst , Rose , Linda Nguyen , and Kamilah C. Taylor .
2013 .
“ Citi- zen Control : Race at the Welfare Office. ” Social Science Quar- terly 94 ( 5 ) : 1283–1307 .
Fording , Richard C. , Joe Soss , and Sanford F. Schram .
2007 .
“ Devolution , Discretion , and the Effect of Local Political Values on TANF Sanctioning. ” Social Service Review 81 : 285– 316 .
Fryer , Roland G. , and Steven D. Levitt .
2004 .
“ The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively Black Names. ” Quarterly Jour- nal of Economics 119 ( 3 ) : 767–805 .
Gilens , Martin .
1999 .
Why Americans Hate Welfare : Race , Media , and the Politics of Anti-Poverty Policy .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press .
Grose , Christian R. 2014 .
“ Field Experimental Work on Political Institutions. ” Annual Review of Political Science 17 : 355–70 .
Hall , Richard L. 1996 .
Participation in Congress .
New Haven , CT : Yale University Press .
Heerwegh , Dirk .
2005 .
“ Effects of Personal Salutations in E-mail Invitations to Participate in a Web Survey. ” Public Opinion Quarterly 4 ( 4 ) : 588–98 .
Henderson , John A. , Jasjeet S. Sekhon , and Rocio Titiunik .
2015 .
“ Cause or Effect ?
Turnout in Hispanic Majority- Minority Districts. ” Working paper , University of California at Berkeley and University of Michigan .
http : //www- personal.umich.edu/titiunik/papers/HispanicTurnout.pdf .
Howard , Daniel J. , and Roger A. Kerin .
2011 .
“ The Effects of Name Similarity on Message Processing and Persuasion. ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 46 ( 1 ) : 63–71 .
Joinson , Adam N. , and Ulf-Dietrich Reips .
2007 .
“ Personalized Salutation , Power of Sender and Response Rates to Web- Based Surveys. ” Computers in Human Behavior 23 ( 3 ) : 1372– 83 .
Jones , Bryan D. , Saadia Greenberg , Clifford Kaufman , and Joseph Drew .
1977 .
“ Bureaucratic Response to Citizen- Initiated Contacts : Environmental Enforcement in Detroit. ” American Political Science Review 71 ( 1 ) : 148–65 .
Katznelson , Ira .
2005 .
When Affirmative Action Was White .
New York : W. W. Norton .
Keiser , Lael R. , Peter R. Mueser , and Seung-Whan Choi .
2004 .
“ Race , Bureaucratic Discretion , and the Implementation of Welfare Reform. ” American Journal of Political Science 48 ( 2 ) : 314–27 .
Kinder , Donald R. , and Cindy D. Kam .
2009 .
Us Against Them : The Ethnocentric Foundations of American Opinion .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press .
Krislov , Samuel .
1974 .
Representative Bureaucracy .
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice-Hall .
Lazio , Rick .
1998 .
“ Title V of the FY 99 VA/HUD Ap- propriations Conference Report : ‘ The Quality Hous- ing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998. ” http : //www .
phada.org/qhwra98.html .
Levitt , Steven D. , and Stephen J. Dubner .
2010 .
Freakonomics .
New York : Harper-Perennial .
Lieberman , Robert C. 1998 .
Shifting the Color Line : Race and the American Welfare State .
Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press .
Lipsky , Michael .
1980 .
Street-Level Bureaucracy .
New York : Russell Sage Foundation .
Marrow , Helen B .
2011 .
New Destination Dreaming : Immigra- tion , Race , and Legal Status in the Rural American South .
Palo Alto , CA : Stanford University Press .
Massey , Douglas S. , and Garvey Lundy .
2001 .
“ Use of Black En- glish and Racial Discrimination in Urban Housing Markets : New Methods and Findings. ” Urban Affairs Review 36 ( 4 ) : 452–69 .
McClendon , Gwyneth H. 2016 .
“ Race and Responsiveness : An Experiment with South African Politicians. ” Journal of Ex- perimental Political Science .
Forthcoming .
https : //docs .
google.com/viewer ? a=v & pid=sites & srcid= ZGVmYXVsdGRvbWFpbnxnd3luZXRobWNjbGVuZG9uf Gd4OjY4OGNlOWM5NTMyMzlkOGE .
Meier , Kenneth J .
1993 .
“ Latinos and Representative Bureau- cracy : Testing the Thompson and Henderson Hypotheses. ” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 3 ( 4 ) : 393–414 .
Meier , Kenneth J. , Robert D. Wrinkle , and J. L. Polinard .
1999 .
“ Representative Bureaucracy and Distributional Equity : Ad- dressing the Hard Question. ” Journal of Politics 61 ( 4 ) : 1025– 39 .
Milkman , Katherine L. , Modupe Akinola , and Dolly Chugh .
2014 .
“ What Happens Before ?
A Field Experiment Ex- ploring How Pay and Representation Differentially Shape Bias on the Pathway into Organizations. ” Working pa- per .
http : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm ? abstract_id= 2063742 .
Mosher , Frederick C. 1968 .
Democracy and the Public Service .
New York : Oxford University Press .
National Low Income Housing Coalition .
2012 .
“ Who Lives in Federally Assisted Housing ? ” http : //nlihc.org/sites/ default/files/HousingSpotlight2-2.pdf .
Pager , Devah , and Hana Shepherd .
2008 .
“ The Sociology of Discrimination : Racial Discrimination in Employment , 116 KATHERINE LEVINE EINSTEIN AND DAVID M. GLICK Housing , Credit , and Consumer Markets. ” Annual Review of Sociology 34 : 181–209 .
Pager , Devah , Bruce Western , and Bart Bonikowski .
2009 .
“ Dis- crimination in a Low-Wage Labor Market : A Field Experi- ment. ” American Sociological Review 2009 74 ( 5 ) : 777–99 .
Pettrigrew , Thomas F. 1998 .
“ Intergroup Contact Theory. ” An- nual Review of Psychology 49 : 65–85 .
Riccucci , Norma M. , Gregg G. Van Ryzin , and Cecilia F. Lavena .
2014 .
“ Representative Bureaucracy in Policing : Does It In- crease Perceived Legitimacy ? ” Journal of Public Administra- tion Theory 24 ( 3 ) : 537–51 .
Schram , Sanford F. , Joe Soss , Richard Fording , and Linda Houser .
2009 .
“ Deciding to Discipline : Race , Choice , and Punishment. ” American Sociological Review 74 ( 3 ) : 398–422 .
Schulman , Kevin A. , Jesse A. Berlin , William Harless , Jon F. Kerner , Shyrl Sistrunk , Bernard J. Gersh , Christopher K. Taleghani , Ross Dubé , Jennifer E. Burke , Sankey Williams , John M. Eisenberg , William Ayers , and José J. Escarce .
1999 .
“ The Effect of Race and Sex on Physicians ’ Recommenda- tions for Cardiac Catheterization. ” New England Journal of Medicine 340 : 618–26 .
Schwartz , Alex F. 2010 .
Housing Policy in the United States .
New York : Routledge .
Soss , Joe , Richard C. Fording , and Sanford F. Schram .
2008 .
“ The Color of Devolution : The Politics of Local Punishment in an Era of Neoliberal Welfare Reform. ” American Journal of Political Science 52 ( 3 ) : 536–53 .
Sowa , Jessica E. , and Sally Coleman Selden .
2003 .
“ Administra- tive Discretion and Active Representation : An Expansion of the Theory of Representative Bureaucracy. ” Public Adminis- tration Review 63 ( 6 ) : 700–710 .
Turner , Margery Austin , Diane K. Levy , Doug Wissoker , Claudia Aranda , Rob Pitingolo , and Rob Santos .
2013 .
“ Housing Discrimination Against Racial and Ethnic Minorities in 2012. ” Urban Institute .
http : //www.huduser .
org/portal/publications/fairhsg/hsg_discrimination_2012 .
html .
Turner , Margery Austin , Stephen L. Ross , George C. Gal- ster , and John Yinger .
2002 .
“ Discrimination in Metropoli- tan Housing Markets : National Results from Phase I HDS 2000. ” Urban Institute .
http : //www.huduser.org/portal /Publications/pdf/Phase1_Report.pdf .
Tversky , Amos , and Daniel Kahneman .
1972 .
“ Availability : Heuristic for Judging Frequency and Probability. ” Cognitive Psychology 4 ( 2 ) : 207–32 .
United States Census Bureau .
2013 .
“ American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates , 2007–2012. ” http : //factfinder .
census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/searchresults.xhtml ? refresh =t .
Vale , Lawrence .
2000 .
From Puritans to the Projects : Public Hous- ing and Public Neighbors .
Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univer- sity Press .
Wattenberg , Martin .
2005 .
“ Baby Names , Visualization , and Social Data Analysis. ” Information Symposium on Information Visualization .
http : //ieeexplore.ieee.org/ stamp/stamp.jsp ? tp= & arnumber=1532122 .
Wei , Iris I. , Beth A. Virnig , Dolly A. John , and Robert O ’ Morgan .
2006 .
“ Using a Spanish Surname Match to Improve Iden- tification of Hispanic Women in Medicare Administrative Data. ” Health Services Research 41 ( 4 ) : 1469–81 .
White , Ariel R. , Noah L. Nathan , and Julie K. Faller .
2015 .
“ What Do I Need to Vote ?
Bureaucratic Discretion and Discrimina- tion by Local Election Officials. ” American Political Science Review 109 ( 1 ) : 129–42 .
Word , David L. , Charles D. Coleman , Robert Nunziata , and Robert Kominski .
2000 .
“ Demographic Aspects of Surnames from Census 2000. ” http : //www2.census.gov/ topics/genealogy/2000surnames/surnames.pdf .
Word , David L. , and R. Colby Perkins .
1996 .
“ Building a Spanish Surname List for the 1990 ’ s—A New Approach to an Old Problem. ” Technical Working Paper No .
13. https : //www .
census.gov/population/documentation/twpno13.pdf .
Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher ’ s website : These tables ( some of which are referred to in the text ) provide supplemental information about our data and models .
Table SI1 : Average community demographics by treat- ment Table SI2 : Logit models for the dependent variable cap- turing whether housing officials re-sponded .
All six treat- ments included separately Table SI3 : Logit models for the dependent variable cap- turing whether housing officials responded in 24 hours if they responded .
Table SI4 : Logit models for the dependent variable cap- turing whether housing officials began responses with a named greeting if they responded .
Table SI5 : Split sample ( by race of emailer ) logit models for the email response dependent variable with cities broken into thirds based on the percent of the population that is black and the percent Hispanic Table SI6 : Split sample ( by race of emailer ) logit models for the named greeting dependent variable with cities broken into thirds based on the percent of the population that is black and the percent Hispanic Table SI7 : Split sample ( by race of emailer ) logit models for getting a response with indicator variables for special types of towns ( e.g .
mainly white or high Hispanic ) .
Table SI8 : Split sample ( by race of emailer ) logit mod- els for getting a named greeting with indicator variables for special types of towns ( e.g .
mainly white or high Hispanic ) .
Figure SI1 : Proportion of responses received in 24 hours ( excluding non-responses )
