Kesebir_JournPerSocPsy_2014_8P4W.pdf
a1K6b.1qcso2YQxUEcAhL4napG7K-Kesebir_JournPerSocPsy_2014_8P4W.pdf.plain.html

PERSONALITY PROCESSES AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES A Quiet Ego Quiets Death Anxiety : Humility as an Existential Anxiety Buffer Pelin Kesebir University of Colorado at Colorado Springs Five studies tested the hypothesis that a quiet ego , as exemplified by humility , would buffer death anxiety .
Humility is characterized by a willingness to accept the self and life without comforting illusions , and by low levels of self-focus .
As a consequence , it was expected to render mortality thoughts less threatening and less likely to evoke potentially destructive behavior patterns .
In line with this reasoning , Study 1 found that people high in humility do not engage in self-serving moral disengagement following mortality reminders , whereas people low in humility do .
Study 2 showed that only people low in humility respond to death reminders with increased fear of death , and established that this effect was driven uniquely by humility and not by some other related personality trait .
In Study 3 , a low sense of psychological entitlement decreased cultural worldview defense in response to death thoughts , whereas a high sense of entitlement tended to increase it .
Study 4 demonstrated that priming humility reduces self-reported death anxiety relative to both a baseline and a pride priming condition .
Finally , in Study 5 , experimentally induced feelings of humility prevented mortality reminders from leading to depleted self-control .
As a whole , these findings obtained from relatively diverse Internet samples illustrate that the dark side of death anxiety is brought about by a noisy ego only and not by a quiet ego , revealing self-transcendence as a sturdier , healthier anxiety buffer than self-enhancement .
Keywords : humility , entitlement , terror management theory , self-transcendence , virtue Humility—the ability to see the self in true perspective—has long been extolled by religious and philosophical traditions .
Writ- ers ancient and modern have considered it a virtue , while deploring and mocking its absence ( Lewis , 1952/2001 ; Marlowe , 1604/1995 ; Shelley , 1818/1994 ) .
Recent empirical research similarly reveals humility as a widely valued and highly regarded personality trait ( Exline & Geyer , 2004 ; Landrum , 2011 ) .
The current research program examined the desirability of humility from a previously unexplored angle and put to test the idea that a sense of humility buffers death anxiety .
Humility involves a willingness to accept the self ’ s limits and its place in the grand scheme of things , accompanied by low levels of self-preoccupation .
As such , it should render the self less vulnerable to threats , of which death constitutes a major and perpetually present instance .
Five studies tested the idea that high levels of trait and state humility would be associated with lower death anxiety and lower defensiveness in the face of death thoughts .
His Majesty the Self It has been said that the self is at once our greatest ally and fiercest enemy ( Leary , 2004 ) .
A highly developed sense of self and the attendant capacities for self-awareness , self-control , and self- evaluation are invaluable tools for goal attainment .
Their emer- gence must have conferred game-changing evolutionary advan- tages to our ancestors , allowing the development of culture and civilization .
Despite its extraordinary affordances , however , hav- ing a self is not an unmitigated blessing : The self has a way of distorting the way we perceive reality ( Greenwald , 1980 ; Taylor & Brown , 1988 ) , and self-generated thoughts and feelings are re- sponsible for a great deal of human suffering ( Ingram , 1990 ) .
The self can be psychologically so burdensome at times that the urge to escape it takes self-destructive forms such as drug and alcohol abuse , binge eating , and even suicide ( Baumeister , 1991 ) .
A robust phenomenon associated with having a self is the desire to see it in a positive light .
The intertwined motives for self- esteem , self-enhancement , and self-protection are exceptionally strong ( Alicke & Sedikides , 2009 ; Sedikides , 1993 ) , and engender what has been referred to as “ a self-zoo full of self-defense mechanisms ” ( Tesser , 2001 , p. 66 ) .
Attesting to the dramatic way in which reality is perceived from behind self-serving lenses , people overestimate their virtues and underestimate their vices , take more credit for positive outcomes and less responsibility for negative outcomes than they deserve , judge their possessions and people close to them exceptionally favorably , and think they are better than average on almost any desirable quality ( Dunning , 2005 ) .
These self-serving biases and a high self-esteem in general are linked to happiness and mental health ( Baumeister , Campbell , Krueger , & Vohs , 2003 ; Taylor & Brown , 1988 ; Taylor , Lerner , Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Pelin Kesebir , Psychology Department , University of Colorado at Colorado Springs , 1420 Austin Bluffs Parkway , Colorado Springs , CO 80918 .
E-mail : kesebir @ gmail.com T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 2014 , Vol .
106 , No .
4 , 610–623 © 2014 American Psychological Association 0022-3514/14/ $ 12.00 DOI : 10.1037/a0035814 610 Sherman , Sage , & McDowell , 2003 ) , yet they do come at a price .
For one , the hunger for perceiving “ me and mine ” favorably is bound to lead to inaccurate perceptions of ourselves , others , and the world ( Gilovich , 1991 ) .
Furthermore , relentlessly striving to maintain and present a certain image of the self can prove destruc- tive or self-destructive .
Research finds that the pursuit of self- esteem can reduce learning and prosocial behavior , impair self- regulation , increase aggression in the face of ego threats , and end up proving detrimental to one ’ s mental and physical health ( Baumeister , Smart , & Boden , 1996 ; Blaine & Crocker , 1993 ; Crocker & Park , 2004 ; Leary , Tchividjian , & Kraxberger , 1994 ) .
The recognition of this dark side of the self has generated an interest in the “ quiet ego ” in recent years ( see Wayment & Bauer , 2008 , for a review ) .
Research on topics such as self-compassion ( Neff , 2003 ) , ecosystem versus egosystem perspectives ( Crocker , 2008 ) , and hypoegoic self-processes ( Leary & Guadagno , 2011 ) explored ways of transcending self-preoccupation and arriving at a less defensive stance toward the self and others .
The theme uni- fying these diverse threads of research was that a quieter ego would be less under the “ curse of the self ” ( Leary , 2004 ) , less prone to self-flattering and self-comforting yet costly behavior patterns , and ultimately more conducive to well-being .
Humility : The Quiet Self Humility is a personality trait that substantially overlaps with the notion of a quiet ego.1 Aided by the positive psychology movement , recent years have witnessed a growing interest in humility as a research topic ( Peterson & Seligman , 2004 , Chapter 20 ; Tangney , 2000 ) .
This body of work portrays humility very positively—as a virtue , a character strength , and an expression of spiritual intelligence ( Emmons , 1999 ) .
Specifically , humility has been related to forgiveness , generosity , helpfulness , better social relationships , and excellence in leadership ; and found to be neg- atively associated with some less desirable personality traits such as neuroticism and narcissism ( Collins , 2001 ; Davis et al. , 2013 ; Exline & Hill , 2012 ; LaBouff , Rowatt , Johnson , Tsang , & Willer- ton , 2012 ; Owens & Hekman , 2012 ; Peters & Rowatt , 2011 ; Rowatt et al. , 2006 ; Vera & Rodriguez-Lopez , 2004 ) .
What is humility , and what does it entail ?
As conceptualized by contemporary social psychologists , “ an accurate assessment of one ’ s characteristics , an ability to acknowledge limitations , and a forgetting of the self ” constitute the core attributes of humility ( Tangney , 2002 , p. 411 ) .
A humble person is first and foremost capable of tolerating an honest look at the self and non-defensively accepting weaknesses alongside strengths ( Exline , 2008 ) .
This does not represent a sense of inferiority or self-denigration , but rather lack of self-aggrandizing biases .
The propensity for seeing the self in true perspective is typically accompanied by an aware- ness of the self ’ s smallness in the grand scheme of things .
Humble people tend to be more sensitive and feel more connected to forces larger than themselves , be this force God , humanity , nature , or the cosmos ( Worthington , 2007 ) .
Finally , and relatedly , those who stand in humility exhibit a remarkable lack of self-focus and a talent for self-forgetfulness , for becoming “ unselved ” ( Tangney , 2000 ) .
They are easily able to take themselves out of the middle of the picture and direct attention toward the greater world beyond .
In seeing , honoring , and potentially contributing to something bigger than themselves , they transcend egotistical concerns and the atten- dant urge for defensive , self-serving maneuvers .
The Mortal Self One of the most onerous burdens that come with self- consciousness is the anticipatory anxiety about death .
All humans , as all living organisms , are going to die ; however , unlike the rest of these organisms who lack the capacity for self-conscious , tem- poral , and abstract thought , humans are condemned to go through life fully aware of the reality of death .
This awareness can be a source of terrorizing anxiety for the self-aware animal that is biologically wired for self-preservation .
Terror management the- ory ( TMT ; Greenberg , Pyszczynski , & Solomon , 1986 ) was erected on this insight , and posited that to be able to function effectively in the world , people need to keep the terrorizing knowl- edge of inevitable mortality at bay .
This is accomplished through an existential anxiety buffering system , the key ingredients of which are a sense of value , meaning , security , and transcendence .
These ingredients are oftentimes provided by self-esteem , faith in one ’ s cultural worldview , and close interpersonal relations .
Since its inception , hundreds of studies have tested and supported hy- potheses derived from TMT , and have demonstrated that death anxiety is a central motivating force for the human psyche , playing a role in domains as diverse as religion and spirituality , legal decision making , human sexuality , materialism , and psychopathol- ogy ( for an overview , see Kesebir & Pyszczynski , 2012 ) .
The question of why people need self-esteem so ardently was one of the original questions that begot TMT , and the role that self-esteem plays in terror management processes has been studied extensively ( for overviews , see Arndt , 2012 ; Pyszczynski , Green- berg , Solomon , Arndt , & Schimel , 2004 ; Pyszczynski & Kesebir , 2013 ) .
A large body of research supports the notion that self- esteem is a critical component of the existential anxiety buffer .
Both experimentally induced and dispositionally high self-esteem have been shown to be associated with lower levels of anxiety , worldview defense , and death-thought accessibility in response to mortality reminders ( Greenberg et al .
1992 ; Harmon-Jones et al. , 1997 ) .
Research also finds that death-thought accessibility in- creases when people think about their “ undesired self ” ( Ogilvie , Cohen , & Solomon , 2008 ) , or when their self-esteem is directly threatened ( J. Hayes , Schimel , Faucher , & Williams , 2008 ) .
In further support of the existentially protective function of self- esteem , death thoughts have been demonstrated to amplify striving for self-esteem in domains one is invested in ( e.g. , Goldenberg , McCoy , Pyszczynski , Greenberg , & Solomon , 2000 ; Taubman Ben-Ari , Florian , & Mikulincer , 1999 ; Vess & Arndt , 2008 ) .
The evidence points to self-esteem as a fundamental resource in dealing with the fragile and finite nature of life .
Yet the desirability of high self-esteem as an existential anxiety buffer remains dis- 1 In the current work , the phrase quiet ego is used in a broad and metaphorical sense , and not to refer to any psychometrically specified construct .
However , Wayment and Bauer ( 2008 ) , who first introduced the term , posit four prototypical qualities of a quiet ego : ( a ) detached aware- ness , ( b ) interdependence , ( c ) compassion , and ( d ) growth .
Accordingly , the quiet ego is a self-perspective that sustains non-defensive self- awareness and constructive self-criticism , balances concerns for the self and others , views the self and others interdependently and with compas- sion , and values personal growth .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
611HUMILITY AS AN EXISTENTIAL ANXIETY BUFFER putable .
A number of studies document that high self-esteem participants respond to mortality reminders in more defensive and potentially destructive ways than low self-esteem participants , displaying increased risk-taking , for instance , or increased ingroup bias and outgroup derogation ( Baldwin & Wesley , 1996 ; Landau & Greenberg , 2006 ; McGregor , Gailliot , Vasquez , & Nash , 2007 ) .
In fact , these results echo the finding that people with high self- esteem respond to self-threats in particularly defensive and aggres- sive ways ( e.g. , Bushman & Baumeister , 1998 ; Crocker , Thomp- son , McGraw , & Ingerman , 1987 ) .
Such parallelism is not astonishing , if we conceive of death as the ultimate threat to the self .
In keeping with the general theme that the pursuit of self- esteem can be costly ( Crocker & Park , 2004 ) , in the context of terror management too , a focus on asserting the self ’ s unique value seems to be associated with mixed consequences .
Could there be other ways for the self to exist that would allow for healthier , more constructive ways of dealing with death anxiety ?
Humility as an Existential Anxiety Buffer The current research program set out to test the idea that a quiet ego , as exemplified by humility , can buffer death anxiety .
A humble outlook , as we have seen , is characterized by a propensity for seeing the self in proper perspective against the bigger picture and by low levels of self-focus .
These qualities cast humility as an effective source of existential comfort and protection .
To start with , those who possess humility have a relatively less intrusive ego that is secure in its reality—the self , to the extent that it is possible , is a non-issue for them .
It follows that threats to the self , including the prospect of death , should be less alarming for humble people .
They should be less likely to overreact and resort to unsavory defenses to fend off the threat .
Furthermore , humility entails a penchant for seeing the larger context and accurately and non-defensively appraising one ’ s place in it .
It would stand to reason that as a result humble people would be more at peace with the nature of existence , including the finiteness of every life .
Given this interrelated set of reasons , humility is expected to shield death anxiety and obviate destructive modes of dealing with the knowl- edge of one ’ s mortality .
Overview of Studies Against this theoretical background , five studies tested the hy- pothesis that humility will buffer death anxiety and render de- fenses aimed at defying death anxiety less likely .
Studies 1–3 examined how trait humility and a sense of entitlement moderate reactions to mortality reminders .
Study 4 directly assessed the impact of a humility manipulation on death anxiety and compared it to the impact of a pride manipulation .
Finally , Study 5 tested the prediction that an experimentally induced humility mindset would thwart the depleting effects of mortality salience ( MS ) on self- control .
As a whole , these studies lie at the intersection of self and identity , TMT , and positive psychology literatures .
The intended goal is to contribute to all three , by showing that the character strength of humility—possessing a quiet ego capable of seeing the self and life in proper perspective—can soothe death anxiety and hinder potentially harmful behavior .
Study 1 Study 1 tested the hypothesis that humility as an individual difference variable would buffer death anxiety .
Participants indi- cated the extent to which they possess humility and were then exposed to an MS manipulation .
The dependent variable was moral disengagement , referring to a proclivity to endorse ethically problematic self-serving behaviors .
Previous research has estab- lished that mortality concerns fuel endorsement of morally ques- tionable behaviors that serve to defend or bolster the components of one ’ s existential anxiety buffer ( Kesebir , Chiu , & Pyszczynski , 2013 ) .
If humble people have a less needy ego that is more accepting of its limitations , then reminders of the fragility of life and the self should not elicit defensive reactions from them .
It was thus hypothesized that individuals higher in possession of humility would not display increased moral disengagement in the face of mortality thoughts .
Method Eighty-eight American participants ( 34 males , 54 females ) with a mean age of 33.73 years ( SD 11.46 ) were recruited on Amazon ’ s Mechanical Turk and completed a short online survey in exchange for 60 cents .
At the beginning of the survey , participants were given 40 virtue words ( taken from Kesebir & Kesebir , 2012 ) and asked to rate how much they possess each .
Specifically , the instructions read : “ In this task we want you to indicate how much you think you possess the following virtues .
Please give spontaneous answers in this task .
We are not here to judge you ; we are only interested in your honest opinions of yourself. ” Scattered among the other virtue words were two words intended to capture humility : humility and humbleness .
Participants indicated on a 7-point Likert scale , ranging from 1 ( not at all like me ) to 7 ( just like me ) , how much they thought they possessed these virtues .
Internal reliability for the two items was satisfactory ( r .67 ) .
Next , participants were randomly assigned to an MS or control condition .
They were asked to come up with three Internet links to pictures of either a death-related ( “ graveyard ” ) or neutral ( “ mug ” ) concept , using the following instructions : “ For the next task , you will be given a word and then asked to come up with three Internet links to pictures that depict the contents of this word .
You can use any web search engine ( e.g. , Google , Yahoo , Bing ) of your choice .
You can choose any picture , as long as it accurately depicts what is asked from you. ” In the next step , participants assigned to the MS condition were told : “ Please enter in the textbox below three separate web addresses , at which we can see pictures of a GRAVEYARD. ” In the control condition , GRAVE- YARD was replaced with MUG .
The MS manipulation was suc- ceeded by the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule ( PANAS ; Watson , Clark , & Tellegen , 1988 ) and an anagram puzzle .
These were meant to provide distraction and delay : Previous TMT re- search has consistently shown distal death defenses to occur more robustly after some distraction ( Greenberg , Pyszczynski , Solomon , Simon , & Breus , 1994 ) .
The dependent variable was assessed with Moral Disengage- ment Scale ( Moore , Detert , Treviño , Baker , & Mayer , 2012 ) , which consists of eight items that measure an individual ’ s incli- nation to morally disengage .
Participants rated on a 7-point scale ( 1 strongly disagree , 7 strongly agree ) their agreement with T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
612 KESEBIR some ethically problematic statements .
Six of these eight state- ments inquired about behaviors that represent attempts at defend- ing or bolstering the components of one ’ s existential anxiety buffer .
These items referred to previously well-established ( e.g. , Hirschberger , 2006 ; Landau et al. , 2004 ; Mikulincer , Florian , & Hirschberger , 2003 ; Pyszczynski et al. , 2004 ) ingredients of the existential anxiety buffer , such as self-esteem ( “ Considering the ways people grossly misrepresent themselves , it ’ s hardly a sin to inflate your own credentials ” ) , relationships with close others ( “ It is okay to spread rumors to defend those you care about ” ) , just world beliefs ( “ People who get mistreated have usually done something to bring it on themselves ” ) , and respect for authority ( “ People shouldn ’ t be held accountable for doing questionable things when they were just doing what an authority figure told them to do ” ) .
It was thus expected that MS would lead to higher endorsement of these items .
For two items on the Moral Disen- gagement Scale ( “ Taking something without the owner ’ s permis- sion is okay as long as you ’ re just borrowing it ” ; “ Some people have to be treated roughly because they lack feelings that can be hurt ” ) , there were no theoretical grounds to expect that death thoughts would increase their endorsement .
These two items were therefore not included in the data analysis .
Finally , participants completed the Balanced Inventory of De- sirable Responding ( BIDR ) .
Self-presentational concerns could affect participants ’ reports of moral disengagement and the anal- ysis aimed to statistically control for this .
The 40-item BIDR consists of two subscales , Self-Deceptive Enhancement and Im- pression Management ( Paulhus , 1988 ) .
Self-deceptive enhance- ment reflects an unintentional tendency to portray oneself in a favorable light , whereas impression management involves inten- tional distortion to portray oneself favorably to others .
On a scale ranging from 1 ( not true ) to 7 ( very true ) , participants indicated their agreement with statements such as “ I never regret my deci- sions ” ( self-deceptive enhancement ; .72 ) and “ When I hear people talking privately , I avoid listening ” ( impression manage- ment ; .83 ) .
Results and Discussion Participant ratings for how much they possess the virtues of humility ( M 5.08 , SD 1.28 ) and humbleness ( M 5.30 , SD 1.13 ) were averaged to create a composite score for humility ( M 5.20 , SD 1.10 ) .
Neither self-deceptive enhancement ( M 4.20 , SD 0.60 ) nor impression management ( M 3.87 , SD 0.85 ) correlated significantly with self-reported humility ( ps .10 ) .
Participants ’ positive and negative affect did not differ as a function of having been assigned to the MS or control group ( ps .56 ) .
As noted above , on the basis of theory , only six out of the eight items in the Moral Disengagement Scale were predicted to be affected by death anxiety ; hence , a composite moral disengage- ment score was created from these six items ( .77 ; M 2.34 , SD 0.88 ) .2 To test the hypothesis that humility will buffer against moral disengagement in the face of MS , a hierarchical regression analysis was conducted on moral disengagement scores .
Humility scores ( mean-centered ) and condition ( coded : 1 control condition , 1 MS ) were entered simultaneously in a first step , followed by the two-way interaction in the second step ( Aiken & West , 1991 ) .
The analysis yielded no main effect for humility , .12 , t ( 84 ) 1.15 , p .25 , or condition , .006 , t ( 84 ) 0.05 , p .96 .
However , there was the predicted Humility Condition interaction , .32 , t ( 84 ) 3.09 , p .003 ( see Figure 1 ) .
Subsequent simple slope analyses demonstrated that for those low in humility ( 1 standard deviation ) , mortality reminders signifi- cantly increased moral disengagement ( .33 , t 2.22 , p .029 ) .
For those high in humility ( 1 standard deviation ) , on the other hand , mortality thoughts significantly decreased moral dis- engagement ( .32 , t 2.17 , p .033 ) .
To put it another way , in the control condition , humility was not associated with moral disengagement , r ( 42 ) .20 , p .20 .
Yet in the MS condition , humility and moral disengagement were significantly negatively associated , r ( 42 ) .44 , p .003 .
A final analysis factored in the role of self-deceptive and self- presentational concerns in responding .
Self-deceptive enhance- ment did not predict moral disengagement , F ( 1 , 86 ) 0.85 , p .36 , whereas impression management strongly did , F ( 1 , 86 ) 13.21 , p .001 .
As a result , only the Impression Management subscale of the BIDR was used in the subsequent analysis as a covariate .
An analysis of covariance revealed that the Condition Humility interaction effect was still significant after controlling for impression management , F ( 1 , 83 ) 11.31 , p .001 , 2 .10 .
The results of Study 1 supported the hypothesized role of humility in buffering death anxiety .
Whereas people low in self- reported humility responded to death reminders with increased willingness to morally disengage in the service of their existential anxiety buffer , people high in humility did not resort to this defense .
Quite the opposite , they became less likely to morally disengage in the presence of death thoughts .
Humility thus was associated not only with an absence of terror management de- fenses , but with a veritable shift of MS responses into a more desirable direction .
One possible explanation is that humble peo- ple , having better insulation against death fear , get to experience mortality thoughts as a perspective provider—a reminder of what life is and how it should be lived .
As a consequence , death makes 2 Creating a composite score for the full eight-item Moral Disengage- ment Scale and submitting it to the same analysis as the six-item scale revealed a similarly significant interaction effect , .30 , t ( 84 ) 2.89 , p .005 .
1.5 2.5 3.5 Low Humility High Humility M or al D is en ga ge m en t Control Mortality Salience Figure 1 .
Moral disengagement as a function of mortality salience and humility .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
613HUMILITY AS AN EXISTENTIAL ANXIETY BUFFER them want to live up to universal standards of value and behave in morally worthy ways , bringing out the best in them .
Study 2 Study 1 provided initial evidence that humility is linked to greater protection from death anxiety .
The purpose of Study 2 was to conceptually replicate this finding and rule out the possibility that the effect could be explained by personality traits potentially related to humility .
Specifically , the study aimed to establish that the known existential anxiety buffers of self-esteem ( Harmon- Jones et al. , 1997 ) , secure attachment ( Mikulincer & Florian , 2000 ) , and mindfulness ( Niemiec et al. , 2010 ) were not responsible for the observed buffering role of humility .
A final consideration was to ascertain that it was not overall virtuousness , or a general prosocial orientation , that shielded from death anxiety , but specif- ically humility .
With these intentions , Study 2 first assessed par- ticipants ’ humility , self-esteem , secure attachment , mindfulness , and general virtuousness and then exposed them to an MS manip- ulation .
The dependent variable was fear of death—an explicit measure of existential anxiety .
It was hypothesized that MS would increase fear of death only for those low , but not for those high , in humility .
This effect was expected to hold even after controlling for self-esteem , secure attachment , mindfulness , and general vir- tuousness .
Method Participants were 142 Americans ( 58 males , 82 females , two unknown ) with a mean age of 37.73 years ( SD 12.33 ) , who were recruited on Amazon ’ s Mechanical Turk and paid 75 cents for their work .
After providing demographic information about them- selves at the beginning of the questionnaire , they completed the following measures in a counterbalanced order .
Humility .
Humility was assessed in the same manner as in Study 1 .
To disguise the true purpose of the study , participants were given 15 words describing various virtues , scattered among which were humility and humbleness .
On a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 ( not at all like me ) to 7 ( just like me ) , participants indicated how much they thought they possessed each of these virtues .
Internal reliability for the two items was identical to that found in the previous study ( r .67 ) .
Self-esteem .
The widely used Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale assessed how positively or negatively participants regard their own worth ( Rosenberg , 1965 ) .
Participants rated on a scale ranging from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 4 ( strongly agree ) their agreement with statements such as “ I feel that I am a person of worth , at least on an equal plane with others ” ( .92 ) .
Secure attachment .
Quality of adult attachment was mea- sured with the 36-item Experience of Close Relationships Scale ( Brennan , Clark , & Shaver , 1998 ) .
The scale separately captures the avoidance and anxiety dimensions of attachment .
Participants responded to 18 items appraising avoidant attachment ( e.g. , “ I get uncomfortable when a romantic partner wants to be very close ” ) and 18 items appraising anxious attachment ( e.g. , “ I need a lot of reassurance that I am loved by my partner ” ) .
Responses were given on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 7 ( strongly agree ) .
Internal reliability for both the avoidance ( .97 ) and anxiety ( .94 ) dimensions was excellent .
Mindfulness .
Mindfulness refers to a state of being attentive to and aware of what is taking place in the present ( K. W. Brown & Ryan , 2003 ) .
People differ in trait mindfulness—their ability or willingness to sustain attention on the present .
In the current study , trait mindfulness was evaluated with the 15-item Mindful Atten- tion Awareness Scale ( K. W. Brown & Ryan , 2003 ) .
On a 7-point scale , participants indicated their agreement with items such as “ I find it difficult to stay focused on what ’ s happening in the present ” and “ I do jobs or tasks automatically , without being aware of what I ’ m doing. ” Responses were coded such that higher scores indi- cated higher trait mindfulness ( .91 ) .
Virtuousness .
Participants ’ degree of humility was assessed with two virtue words ( humility and humbleness ) embedded within a list of 15 virtues .
To capture participants ’ general level of virtue , an index was created using the 13 remaining virtue words in this list after excluding humility and humbleness .
On a 7-point Likert scale , ranging from 1 ( not at all like me ) to 7 ( just like me ) , participants thus rated how much they thought they possessed the virtues of honesty , patience , compassion , integrity , honor , loyalty , kindness , sincerity , trustworthiness , courage , forgiveness , gener- osity , and wisdom ( .87 ) .
After completing these measures , participants were randomly assigned to an MS or control condition .
As in Study 1 , participants in the MS condition were asked to come up with three Internet links to pictures that depict a “ graveyard. ” Participants in the control condition , on the other hand , were instructed to come up with three Internet links to pictures of a “ pen. ” The manipulation was followed by PANAS ( Watson et al. , 1988 ) and an anagram task meant to distract and delay .
Finally , the dependent measure , fear of death , was captured with the Your Own Death subscale of the Collett–Lester Fear of Death Scale ( Lester , & Abdel-Khalek , 2003 ) .
Participants indicated on a scale from 1 ( not at all ) to 5 ( a great deal ) how much they fear different aspects of their personal death such as “ never thinking or experiencing anything again ” or “ the disintegration of your body after you die. ” The subscale consists of seven items ; however , in light of the age range and distribution of the current sample , with about 40 % of participants being above the age of 40 , the item “ dying young ” was dropped.3 Cronbach ’ s for the remaining six items was .91 .
Results and Discussion As in Study 1 , participant ratings for how much they possess the virtues humility ( M 5.25 , SD 1.31 ) and humbleness ( M 5.20 , SD 1.28 ) were averaged to create a composite humility score .
Composite scores were also created for the variables of self-esteem , anxious attachment , avoidant attachment , mindful- ness , and virtue .
Please refer to Table 1 for descriptive statistics and intercorrelations .
Analyses confirmed that being in the MS or control condition was not associated with differential positive or negative affect ( ps .28 ) .
To test the hypothesis that humility will buffer the anxiety following mortality reminders , a hierarchical regression analysis was conducted on death fear scores ( M 2.57 , SD 1.16 ) .
Humility scores ( mean-centered ) and condition ( coded : 1 3 Analyses including this item still yielded a significant Humility Condition interaction , .20 , t ( 138 ) 2.39 , p .018 .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
614 KESEBIR control condition , 1 MS ) were entered simultaneously in a first step , followed by the two-way interaction in the second step .
The analysis yielded no main effect for humility , .08 , t ( 138 ) 0.93 , p .35 , or condition , .001 , t ( 138 ) 0.004 , p .997 .
Yet , as expected , the Humility Condition interaction was sig- nificant , .22 , t ( 138 ) 2.63 , p .009 ( see Figure 2 ) .
Simple slope analyses to decompose the interaction revealed that for those low in humility ( 1 standard deviation ) , mortality re- minders marginally increased death fear ( .22 , t 1.86 , p .065 ) , whereas for those high in humility ( 1 standard deviation ) , they marginally decreased it ( .22 , t 1.89 , p .061 ) .
Probing the interaction using the Johnson–Neyman technique ( A. F. Hayes , 2013 ) allowed to pinpoint the standardized values of humility in the data set at which MS started to increase and decrease fear of death significantly : For participants 1.35 standard deviation below the mean in humility , mortality thoughts signifi- cantly increased fear of death , whereas for those 1.31 standard deviation above the mean they significantly decreased it .
To rule out the hypothesis that some other construct related to humility was responsible for the observed effects , an analysis of covariance was conducted .
The model included MS , humility , and the Humility Condition interaction .
Additionally , self-esteem , mindfulness , anxious attachment , avoidant attachment , and virtu- ousness were entered as covariates ( all mean-centered ) , after ver- ifying that they fulfilled the homogeneity of regression slopes assumption .
From the five covariates , anxious attachment signifi- cantly predicted death fear , F ( 1 , 133 ) 29.66 , p .001 , and avoidant attachment marginally predicted it , F ( 1 , 133 ) 3.68 , p .057 .
Self-esteem , mindfulness , and general virtue did not exert any main effect on death fear ( ps .62 ) .
Most importantly , the Humility Condition interaction emerged as significant from this analysis , F ( 1 , 133 ) 13.83 , p .001 .
Indeed , the effect was stronger ( 2 .08 ) , compared to a model that did not include the covariates ( 2 .05 ) .
The current study provided additional evidence for the existen- tial anxiety buffering function of humility by demonstrating that MS increases death fear only for those who are low in humility .
In contrast , for participants high in humility , thinking about one ’ s mortality was associated with lower death fear .
Thus , as in Study 1 , when humility was combined with mortality thoughts , it not only failed to increase reactive responses , but effectively reduced them .
Study 2 furthermore revealed the unique predictive power of humility over the constructs of self-esteem , secure attachment , mindfulness , and general virtuousness .
After controlling for these variables , humility still moderated the effect of mortality remind- ers on death fear .
Study 3 To provide further support for the hypothesis that humility shields against death anxiety , Study 3 focused on a variable rep- resenting the absence of humility—a sense of entitlement .
Psycho- logical entitlement is a key component of narcissism , and is defined as “ a stable and pervasive sense that one deserves more and is entitled to more than others ” ( Campbell , Bonacci , Shelton , Exline , & Bushman , 2004 , p. 31 ) .
Entitlement is negatively related to humility , especially to certain operationalizations of it ( Rowatt et al. , 2006 ) .
In stark contrast to humble people , entitled people are deeply preoccupied with their own needs and convinced that they deserve special treatment .
Entitlement has also been shown to predict a number of undesirable outcomes such as greedy inten- tions in a commons dilemma , selfish approaches to romantic relationships , and higher aggression following ego threat ( Camp- bell et al. , 2004 ) .
If entitlement , with its relentless focus on the self and its lack of concern for other people ’ s rights and needs , em- bodies the “ noisy ego , ” then it should be associated with height- ened defensive reactions to mortality thoughts .
The dependent variable for the study was chosen as cultural worldview defense , operationalized as anti-Islam prejudice .
TMT research has shown repeatedly that reminders of death increase discrimination , hostility , and aggression toward those who do not share one ’ s cultural worldview ( e.g. , Greenberg et al. , 1994 ; McGregor et al. , 1998 ; Pyszczynski , Abdollahi , Solomon , Green- berg , & Weise , 2006 ) , including those who do not share one ’ s religion ( Greenberg et al. , 1990 ) .
In light of the hypothesized protective function of the quiet ego , it was predicted that those 2 2.5 3 3.5 Low Humility High Humility Fe ar o f D ea th Control Mortality Salience Figure 2 .
Fear of death as a function of mortality salience and humility .
Table 1 Descriptive Statistics and Intercorrelations for the Trait Measures in Study 2 Variable M SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 .
Humility 5.23 1.18 — .08 .001 .18 .12 .51 2 .
Self-esteem 3.20 0.61 — .55 .49 .54 .46 3 .
Anxious attachment 3.16 1.29 — .36 .43 .34 4 .
Avoidant attachment 2.69 1.26 — .46 .48 5 .
Mindfulness 4.72 1.13 — .41 6 .
Virtuousness 5.73 0.73 — p .05. p .01 .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
615HUMILITY AS AN EXISTENTIAL ANXIETY BUFFER with a low sense of entitlement would not respond to MS with increased worldview defense in the form of anti-Islam prejudice .
Method Seventy-eight American participants ( 40 males , 38 females ; mean age 34.94 years , SD 15.11 ) were recruited on Amazon ’ s Mechanical Turk to complete a short survey and received 45 cents in return .
Participants first completed the nine-item Psychological Enti- tlement Scale ( Campbell et al. , 2004 ) .
They rated on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 7 ( strongly agree ) their agreement with items such as “ I honestly feel I ’ m just more deserving than others ” and “ I feel entitled to more of every- thing ” ( .88 ) .
Next , they were randomly assigned to an MS or control condition .
Those in the MS condition responded to the question “ Please write two sentences about what you feel when you think about the fact that you will die someday , ” while those in the control condition responded to “ Please write two sentences about what you feel when you think about experiencing intense pain during a visit to the dentist. ” As in the previous two studies , the MS manipulation was followed by PANAS ( Watson et al. , 1988 ) and an anagram task , intended to delay and distract .
The dependent variable , anti-Islam prejudice , was captured with a six-item measure .
On a 7-point scale ( 1 strongly disagree , 7 strongly agree ) , participants indicated their agreement with state- ments about Islam and Muslims ( .79 ) .
Adapted from Imhoff and Recker ( 2012 ) , sample items included “ Compared to other religious and philosophical approaches Islam is rather primitive , ” “ Any critique of the West brought forward by representatives of Islam is exaggerated and unjustified , ” and “ Hostility against Mus- lims is an intolerable form of discrimination ” ( reverse-coded ) .
Finally , participants provided some demographic information about themselves.4 Results and Discussion Participant responses to the Psychological Entitlement Scale and the Anti-Islam Prejudice measure were averaged to create com- posite scores of entitlement ( M 3.57 , SD 1.09 ) and anti-Islam prejudice ( M 3.56 , SD 1.11 ) .
Entitlement was significantly related to age , with younger people reporting higher entitlement , r ( 75 ) .23 , p .042 .
There was also a non-significant trend for men to feel more entitled , t ( 75 ) 1.60 , p .115 .
Anti-Islam prejudice , on the other hand , was not predicted by age or sex ( ps .15 ) .
Negative or positive affect did not differ as a function of experimental condition either ( ps .45 ) .
To test the hypothesis that a low sense of entitlement would buffer against cultural worldview defense in the face of death thoughts , a hierarchical regression analysis was conducted on anti-Islam prejudice .
Entitlement scores ( mean-centered ) and con- dition ( coded : 1 control condition , 1 MS ) were entered in a first step , followed by the two-way interaction in the second step .
The analysis yielded no main effect for condition , .06 , t ( 73 ) 0.50 , p .62 .
Entitlement was not significantly asso- ciated with anti-Islam prejudice either , .15 , t ( 73 ) 1.40 , p .17 .
There was , however , the hypothesized Condition Entitle- ment interaction , .33 , t ( 73 ) 3.01 , p .004 ( see Figure 3 ) .
Probing the interaction revealed that for those high in entitlement ( 1 standard deviation on the Psychological Entitlement Scale ) , reminders of mortality marginally increased anti-Islam prejudice , .28 , t 1.80 , p .077 .
For those low in entitlement ( 1 standard deviation ) , on the other hand , mortality thoughts signif- icantly decreased anti-Islam prejudice , .39 , t 2.47 , p .016 .
Looked at differently , entitlement did not predict anti-Islam prejudice in the control condition , .17 , t ( 36 ) 1.06 , p .30 .
Yet in the MS condition , a higher sense of entitlement signif- icantly and strongly predicted higher anti-Islam prejudice , .49 , t ( 37 ) 3.39 , p .002 .
These findings lend support to the hypothesis that a low sense of entitlement protects against death anxiety .
Exposed to mortality thoughts , those high in entitlement tended to feel more prejudice toward Islam , presumably in an attempt to ward off death anxiety by asserting the superiority of their own worldview .
Those low in entitlement , on the other hand , not only did not exhibit such defensive reactions , but went the opposite route and became sig- nificantly less prejudiced .
Thus , as in Studies 1 and 2 , when a quiet ego was combined with mortality thoughts , it brought out arguably more desirable behaviors .
These results , taken together , suggest that a quiet ego not only shields death anxiety but also drives those who possess it toward less defensive and more tolerant modes of coping .
In other words , humility appears to be not only a buffer , but also a source of perspective and insight in the face of death anxiety .
Study 4 Using an individual differences approach , the first three studies demonstrated that higher levels of self-reported humility and lower levels of self-reported psychological entitlement predict lower anxiety and defensiveness in response to mortality thoughts .
Although these findings were promisingly consistent with the idea that a quiet ego quiets death anxiety , Study 4 4 The demographic items , regrettably , did not inquire about participants ’ religious affiliation , which would have allowed us to rule out the presence of Muslim participants in the sample .
The rate of Muslims in the general American population , as well as observed in previous Mechanical Turk samples , is less than 1 % , however , rendering it unlikely that this limitation would threaten the validity of the results in a significant way .
2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 Low Entitlement High Entitlement A nt i-I sl am P re ju di ce Control Mortality Salience Figure 3 .
Anti-Islam prejudice as a function of mortality salience and entitlement .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
616 KESEBIR employed a more direct test of this hypothesis .
Specifically , participants were primed with humility and then asked to report their fear of death .
If humility indeed protects against death anxiety , a straightforward prediction would be that participants primed with humility would experience lower death anxiety than participants in a neutral condition .
In addition to a neutral condition , the design adopted a pride priming condition .
Pride predicts self-esteem better than any other emotion ( J. D. Brown & Marshall , 2001 ) and has oftentimes been contrasted with humility ( e.g. , Comte-Sponville , 2001 ; Sandage & Moe , 2011 ) .
Pride is predicated on attributions of value and importance to the self , and these attributions , while boosting the ego and granting some armor against anxiety , could simultaneously make threats to the self more disturbing—for the more valuable and important the self is perceived to be , the more unbearable a fate death should become .
It was hence hypothesized that humility would prove a more effective soother of death anxiety than pride .
Method One hundred sixty-five participants ( 88 males , 77 females ) were recruited on Amazon ’ s Mechanical Turk and participated in the study in exchange for 40 cents ( mean age 32.18 years , SD 12.98 ) .
At the beginning of the study , participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions : humility , pride , or baseline .
In the humility and pride conditions , they were told that they would be asked to write about some personal experiences .
In the humility condition , the in- structions read : “ Please write about a time in your life when you felt humility .
How did you feel and what did you think ? ” Owing to the fact that humility at times tends to be confused with humiliation ( Exline & Geyer , 2004 ) , which is a construct deeply different from the quiet ego , participants were expressly warned : “ Note that we do NOT want you to write about a ‘ humiliating ’ incident , one that made you feel ashamed , guilty , or foolish .
Rather , we are interested in experi- ences that provided you with a down-to-earth perspective of yourself in relation to all other beings. ” In the pride condition , on the other hand , participants were asked : “ Please write about a time in your life when you felt pride .
How did you feel and what did you think ? ” Finally , participants in the baseline condition skipped this part of the survey .
Next , all participants completed the PANAS ( Watson et al. , 1988 ) to ensure that the experimental conditions did not elicit differ- ential moods .
The dependent variable was death anxiety , which was assessed with the 12-item Death Anxiety Scale ( Templer , 1970 ) .
On a 7-point Likert scale ( 1 strongly disagree , 7 strongly agree ) , participants reported their agreement with statements such as “ I am very much afraid to die , ” “ I often think about how short life really is , ” and “ The thought of death never bothers me ” ( reverse-coded ) .
The scale had very good internal reliability ( .89 ) .
Results and Discussion Even though participants were explicitly instructed not to report instances of humiliation in the humility condition , an initial in- spection of the open-ended responses revealed a good number of participants who wrote about personal humiliation or embarrass- ment ( e.g. , “ I felt humiliation when I lost my job for no reason ” ; “ When I got pregnant I felt guilty because I felt like I let down my parents ” ; “ I felt humiliated when I had to do a lip-sync in front of my whole high school .
Our routine was not very good and a lot of people laughed at us ” ) .
Hence , prior to data analysis , all responses to the humility condition were reviewed and those with content clearly not about a quiet ego were excluded from further analysis ( n 14 ) .5 Composite death anxiety scores were created by averaging participant ratings on the Death Anxiety Scale ( M 4.27 , SD 1.22 ) .
Age was not related to death anxiety ( p .34 ) ; however , gender was , t ( 149 ) 2.51 , p .013 .
Women reported higher death anxiety ( M 4.53 , SD 1.20 ) in comparison to men ( M 4.04 , SD 1.20 ) .
Analyses revealed that experimental condition did not significantly affect positive ( p .11 ) or negative affect ( p .97 ) .
A one-way between-subjects analysis of variance was per- formed on death anxiety to examine the effect of experimental condition , which yielded a significant effect , F ( 2 , 148 ) 4.05 , p .019 , 2 .05 .
Supporting the hypotheses , planned contrasts demonstrated that participants in the humility condition reported significantly lower death anxiety ( M 3.79 , SD 1.30 ) compared to both the pride condition ( M 4.45 , SD 1.07 ) , t ( 148 ) 2.71 , p .008 , d 0.55 , and the baseline condition ( M 4.39 , SD 1.28 ) , t ( 148 ) 2.33 , p .021 , d 0.47 ( see Figure 4 ) .
These findings constitute particularly compelling evidence for the existentially protective nature of humility , by revealing a one-to-one relationship between a humble outlook and lower death anxiety .
Relative to participants in both the baseline and pride conditions , those who remembered a humbling moment in their lives felt less anxious about death .
The theme reverberating through participant accounts of humility was one of recognizing their own smallness ( “ Sometimes looking up at the stars or watch- ing the sun rise really makes you feel small ” ) or imperfection ( “ I kept insisting I was correct , but came to find out I was wrong all along ” ) .
Yet this realization was experienced not as distressing but comforting and even inspiring .
Many of these memories also involved seeing one ’ s life in perspective ( “ I got a good look at people ’ s houses and the way they live , and that made me realize each one of those houses had a family in it just like mine , all trying to live and survive every day , just like mine ” ) , especially in comparison to more difficult lives ( “ I visited a homeless shelter and it humbled me because I realized how much I really have ” ) .
The humility prime thus seemed to bring forth a self that is able to see itself and life more clearly for what it is , yet was at peace with this reality .
The relative deproblematization of the self and the acceptance of its place in the grand scheme of things , as reflected in these accounts , was presumably responsible for rendering death less unsettling a fact for participants in the humility condition .
Notably , recalling moments of pride did not result in diminished death anxiety .
Pride is an emotion geared toward enhancing and affirming the self , regardless of whether it is born authentically from achievement and mastery or embodies hubristic feelings of arrogance , grandiosity , and superiority ( Tracy & Robins , 2007 ) .
The self takes the center stage in the phenomenology of pride , 5 An analysis of variance that does not exclude these 14 responses still yielded a significant effect of experimental condition on death anxiety , F ( 2 , 162 ) 3.80 , p .024 , though the effect was weaker .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
617HUMILITY AS AN EXISTENTIAL ANXIETY BUFFER which likely explains why it failed to effectively soothe death anxiety .
For all the anxiety buffering potential it carries , a boost to the self also is capable of making the assured finiteness of the self a proportionately more dreadful prospect .
Study 4 thus demon- strated that a quiet ego offers protection from death anxiety and does it better than a swollen ego .
Study 5 This final study manipulated both mortality thoughts and a humility mindset to assess the existentially protective function of humility on self-control .
Self-control—the ability of the self to override one response to substitute a more adaptive alternative—is a particularly important outcome variable .
It is a key to success in various life domains , and failures at it are associated with a plethora of problems , from violence and crime to addiction , from unwanted pregnancies to obesity ( Baumeister , Vohs , & Tice , 2007 ) .
Previous research has established a reciprocal relationship between death anxiety and self-control : Both trait and state self- control are associated with more effective management of death anxiety , whereas coping with death thoughts depletes self-control ( Gailliot , Schmeichel , & Baumeister , 2006 ) .
It has also been demonstrated that MS intensifies the desire to avoid self- awareness ( Arndt , Greenberg , Simon , Pyszczynski , & Solomon , 1998 ) .
This desire oftentimes translates into increased temptation for escapist behaviors such as eating junk food , drinking alcohol , or shopping , which might represent self-regulatory failure .
If hum- ble self-views mollify death anxiety , then mortality thoughts should not lead to depleted self-control and increased temptation among participants primed with humility .
Employing a 2 ( humility vs. control ) 2 ( MS vs. control ) factorial design , the current study tested this hypothesis .
Method Participants were 197 Americans ( 127 males , 70 females ) with a mean age of 29.16 years ( SD 9.11 ) , who were recruited on Amazon ’ s Mechanical Turk marketplace and paid 55 cents for their work .
At the beginning of the survey , participants provided demographic information about themselves , after which they were exposed to a humility or control condition .
As in Study 4 , those in the humility condition were instructed to write about a time in their life when they felt humility .
They were also warned to write about an incident that provided them with a down-to-earth perspective of themselves and not about a humiliating , embarrassing , or shameful one .
This warning was underlined this time , to make it more conspicuous .
Those in the control condition , on the other hand , were asked to write about a time in their lives when they felt humidity .
Specifically , the instructions read : “ Please write about a time in your life when you felt humidity ( in the air ) .
How did you feel and what did you think ? ” Humidity was deemed suitable as a control condition because it is a weather phenomenon with poten- tially no power to psychologically impact participants in a mean- ingful way.6 Immediately following the humility manipulation , participants were assigned to either an MS or control condition .
Parallel to the MS manipulation in Studies 1 and 2 , they were asked to come up with three web addresses that depict a graveyard ( in the MS condition ) or a pen ( control condition ) .
The MS manipulation was followed by PANAS ( Watson et al. , 1988 ) and a word generation task ( “ Write down in the boxes below the first five words that come to your mind that start with the letter T ” ) , meant to provide delay and distraction .
The dependent variable , self-control , was assessed with a mea- sure of felt temptation .
Drawn largely from Tsukayama , Duck- worth , and Kim ( 2012 ) , a Temptation Scale was created for the purposes of the current study .
Participants were presented with eight activities that imply low levels of self-control .
These activ- ities were putting off work that needs to get done , purchasing things , procrastinating , drinking beer , doing nothing , eating fried food , spending rather than saving your money , and getting drunk .
The instructions read : “ Please indicate on the following scale how tempted you would be to do the following activities RIGHT NOW , if there were no long-term consequences for yourself or anyone else .
That is , how attracted do you feel to these activities right now regardless of how harmful you might think they are ? ” Participants were prompted to be as spontaneous and honest in their responses as they could , with the preface that “ we are here not to judge you , but to understand human behavior. ” They indicated their responses on a scale from 1 ( not tempted at all ) to 5 ( very tempted ) .
The Temptation Scale displayed acceptable internal reliability ( .82 ) .
Results and Discussion As in the previous study , an inspection of the open-ended responses given in the humility condition revealed that some participants wrote about shame , failure , or humiliation experiences instead of humility .
These participants ( n 5 ) were excluded from further data analyses.7 The remaining participants ’ responses to the Temptation Scale were averaged to elicit an overall score of temptation ( M 2.80 , SD 0.91 ) .
Temptation was not associated with positive affect , negative affect , or sex ( all ps .80 ) .
There 6 This control condition was admittedly inspired by Yogi Berra ’ s slip- up , “ It ain ’ t the heat , it ’ s the humility. ” 7 Analyses showed that including these participants ’ data would not have changed the statistical significance of the predicted Humility MS Con- dition interaction , F ( 1 , 193 ) 8.19 , p .005 .
2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 Humility Pride Baseline Death Anxiety Figure 4 .
Death anxiety as a function of experimental condition .
Error bars : 1 standard error .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
618 KESEBIR was a non-significant trend for a negative association between age and self-reported temptation , r ( 190 ) .12 , p .098 .
Temptation scores were submitted to a 2 ( humility condition : humility vs. control ) 2 ( MS condition : MS vs. control ) between- subjects analysis of variance .
The analysis yielded no main effect of the humility manipulation on temptation , F ( 1 , 188 ) 1.06 , p .31 .
Nor was a main effect observed for the MS manipulation , F ( 1 , 188 ) 0.11 , p .74 .
The predicted Humility MS Condition interaction , however , was significant , F ( 1 , 188 ) 7.20 , p .008 , 2 .04 .
How mortality reminders affected participants ’ felt temptation thus depended on whether they were exposed to a humility prime .
Consistent with previous research on the delete- rious effects of MS on self-control ( Gailliot et al. , 2006 ) , MS amplified felt temptation when not accompanied by the humility prime , F ( 1 , 188 ) 5.16 , p .024 , 2 .03 .
Yet when humility thoughts preceded mortality reminders , this effect was eliminated and furthermore replaced by a trend in the opposite direction : MS tended to make participants less likely to feel temptation in the presence of humility thoughts , F ( 1 , 188 ) 2.47 , p .118 , 2 .013 ( see Figure 5 ) .
Once again , an experimentally induced quiet ego led to more desirable psychological outcomes in the face of mortality remind- ers .
Participants in the humility condition did not experience impaired self-control when prompted to think about personal mor- tality , and they even displayed a potential for improved self- control .
This last finding , albeit not reaching significance , echoed the results from Studies 1 , 2 , and 3 , in which trait humility combined with mortality thoughts generated a shift in the less reactive , less defensive , less unsavory direction .
The current study can also be thought of as a test of the hypoegoic self-regulation idea , according to which diminishing the self ’ s involvement in the self-regulation process can yield better results , as self-thoughts often interfere with the ability to regulate , proving ineffective or even counterproductive ( Leary , Adams , & Tate , 2006 ; Leary & Guadagno , 2011 ) .
Humility is a hypoegoic state by definition , and the protective role it played under the normally depleting MS condition attests to the merits of the hypoegoic self-regulation concept , particularly in contexts when the self is under threat .
General Discussion Five studies tested and found support for the hypothesis that a quiet , humble ego buffers death anxiety .
The first three studies showed that high self-reported humility and low psychological entitlement were associated with lower death anxiety ( Study 2 ) and lower death anxiety-induced defensiveness—in the form of self- serving moral disengagement ( Study 1 ) or cultural worldview defense ( Study 3 ) .
It was also established in Study 2 that humility wards off death anxiety above and beyond the potentially related constructs of self-esteem , secure attachment , mindfulness , and general virtuousness .
Study 4 provided direct evidence for the existentially soothing role of humility , by documenting that an experimentally induced humility mindset decreases self-reported death anxiety .
Finally , Study 5 demonstrated that activating hum- ble self-views can prevent mortality thoughts from draining self- control .
The results were consistent across different operational- izations of the quiet ego and across different dependent variables , providing converging evidence for the a-quiet-ego-quiets-death- anxiety hypothesis as a whole .
The picture of the humble self emerging from these studies is one that is naturally fortified against death anxiety .
Humility involves seeing and accepting the truth about the self .
In its most basic meaning , this implies knowing one ’ s strengths and weak- nesses , coming to terms with one ’ s imperfections .
As a result , the humble self is relatively protected from the need for self-serving distortions and defensive reactions to self-threats .
On a deeper level though , humility also involves accurately judging the self ’ s place within the larger context of existence .
The humble person is thus probably more aware and accepting of the fact that against a cosmic scale of time and space , every human being is minute .
This should turn personal mortality into a somewhat lesser tragedy and , potentially , into a source of clarity and guidance as to how life should be lived .
In the present work , memories of pride failed to reduce death anxiety , whereas memories of humility successfully did .
This was a direct test of the comparative merits of humility and self- affirmation as soothers of death anxiety .
Affirming the self has traditionally been regarded as a main vehicle to cope with self- threat in social psychology ( e.g. , Steele , 1988 ) .
Terror manage- ment literature too , from its inception , has focused on self-esteem and faith in cultural worldviews—representing affirming “ me ” and “ mine ” —as the primary existential anxiety buffers .
Yet as noted , relying so heavily on the self as a value base comes with certain costs ; and scholars recently started to point to self-transcendence as a potentially sturdier bulwark against self-threats than self- enhancement ( Burson , Crocker , & Mischkowski , 2012 ; Crocker , Niiya , & Mischkowski , 2008 ; Kesebir et al. , 2013 ) .
Humility , with its minimized focus on the self and its affinity for seeing the self and life within a grander context , substantially overlaps with self-transcendence .
The current work echoes the same sentiment that in the face of self-threats , transcending the self can be more conducive to personally and socially desirable outcomes than enhancing the self .
In the case of death , this is probably especially true—not only should self-affirmation be of limited value against a threat as formidable as death , but boosting the ego would simultaneously boost life ’ s value , rendering mortality a more ter- rifying prospect .
2 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3 3.2 Humility Control Temptation Mortality Salience Control Figure 5 .
Temptation as a function of humility and mortality salience .
Error bars : 1 standard error .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
619HUMILITY AS AN EXISTENTIAL ANXIETY BUFFER It is worth considering , in light of the present findings , the relationship between humility and self-esteem and their respective roles in terror management processes .
Writings on humility repeat- edly make the point that it is the secure who are humble , that no ego paradoxically is strong ego .
Genuine humility , characterized by being able to acknowledge one ’ s limitations and not needing to resort to defensiveness under ego threat , indeed connotes a firmly grounded sense of self-worth .
Humility and self-esteem would overlap then , to the extent that self-esteem reflects authentic , securely rooted feelings of self-worth , and not a fragile self ’ s overinflated pretenses at self-value .
In that sense , humility should be more strongly associated with implicit self-esteem—a global evaluation of the self that is less filtered , less susceptible to self-serving biases and impression management attempts—than with explicit self-esteem .
Research finds that implicit self-esteem in general confers protection from ego threats ( e.g. , Greenwald & Farnham , 2000 ; McGregor & Jordan , 2007 ) ; and in the case of death threats , the anxiety-buffering capacity of self-esteem has been shown to stem more from implicit than explicit self-esteem ( Schmeichel et al. , 2009 ) .
Though humility encompasses more than high implicit self-esteem ( i.e. , implicit self-esteem probably is a necessary but not sufficient component of humility ) , the dem- onstrated protective function of humility reemphasizes the value of securely held feelings of self-worth in the face of ego threats .
Even though the present research program offered compelling evidence that humility buffers death anxiety , it did not identify the precise mechanisms through which this effect is occurring .
What underlying processes are responsible for the mollifying effect of humility ?
Which psychological ingredients make the quiet ego a unique buffer , shielding death anxiety above and beyond other known buffers such as self-esteem or secure attachment ?
I have argued that key to the effects of humility are the interrelated qualities of self-transcendence , perspective and acceptance .
Hum- ble people likely see themselves from a higher , broader , truer perspective , and struggle less with accepting what they see .
This possibly renders threats to the self less distressing and the reality of death easier to accept .
Self-esteem , and other buffers that rely on boosting the value of “ me and mine , ” potentially work by making the self feel more powerful and less vulnerable in the face of death .
Humility , on the other hand , might work not by making the self bigger but rather by making death smaller .
These claims— that humility renders death less frightening , because the humble are better at seeing and accepting their own smallness and fragil- ity—doubtlessly need to be subjected to further empirical scrutiny .
Future research investigating the role of perspective/wisdom and acceptance in assuaging death anxiety would be particularly wel- comed .
The finding that humility can serve as a source of strength in coping with death anxiety adds to a newly emerging body of research demonstrating the desirability of humility as a personality trait and revealing the humble ego as “ an undervalued psycholog- ical stock ” ( Exline , 2008 , p. 56 ) .
If seeing and accepting reality for what it is is indispensable to wisdom and if highest levels of self-development require a quieting of the ego and a transcending of the self ( Ardelt , 2008 ) , then humility is part and parcel of wisdom and maturity .
Humility also is closely associated with virtues such as kindness , respectfulness , gratitude , and mercy .
In light of all this , it is concerning that in the United States , the past several decades witnessed a shift toward radical individualism and the glorification of a self-oriented worldview ( e.g. , Bellah , Mad- sen , Sullivan , Swindler , & Tipton , 1985 ; Myers , 2000 ; Putnam , 2000 ) .
This shift comes with a rise in phenomena such as narcis- sism , psychological entitlement , overcompetitiveness , appearance obsession , and attention seeking ( Twenge , 2006 ; Twenge & Campbell , 2009 ) , denoting an overall decline of humility as a value .
This decline is explicitly manifested in cultural products : A survey of a large corpus of American books documents an average drop of 44.33 % in the appearance frequency of the words humility and humbleness from 1901 to 2000 ( Kesebir & Kesebir , 2012 ) .
Religions traditionally encourage humility and self-transcendence , and the weakening influence of religion on the American public in the past decades ( e.g. , Chaves , 2011 ) might have contributed to this picture as well .
If humility buffers death anxiety , as the current work indicates , its waning cultural importance does not bode well for individual and societal well-being .
Psychological dysfunction is considered to entail extreme , graceless , or inefficient ways of dealing with death anxiety ( Becker , 1971 , 1973 ; Yalom , 1980 ) , and mismanagement of death anxiety has been empirically implicated in a number of psychological disorders including phobias , compulsive behavior , and post-traumatic stress disorder ( Arndt , Routledge , Cox , & Goldenberg , 2005 ; Pyszczynski & Kesebir , 2011 ; Strachan et al. , 2007 ) .
Myriad unsavory or harmful behavior tendencies , such as prejudice , intergroup aggression , materialism , and self-regulatory failure , are also fueled by existential anxiety .
The current work reveals that only a magnified sense of self brings out this dark side of existential anxiety , whereas a small , quiet , humble self , if anything , is associated with desirable behavior patterns in response to mortality thoughts .
In admission to powerlessness against the bounds of one ’ s reality seems to lie an ironic strength , which makes rediscovering humility as a virtue and cultivating it a worthy endeavor .
References Aiken , L. S. , & West , S. G. ( 1991 ) .
Multiple regression : Testing and interpreting interactions .
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .
Alicke , M. D. , & Sedikides , C. ( 2009 ) .
Self-enhancement and self- protection : What they are and what they do .
European Review of Social Psychology , 20 , 1–48 .
doi:10.1080/10463280802613866 Ardelt , M. ( 2008 ) .
Self-development through selflessness : The paradoxical process of growing wiser .
In H. A. Wayment & J. J. Bauer ( Eds .
) , Transcending self-interest : Psychological explorations of the quiet ego ( pp .
221–233 ) .
Washington , DC : American Psychological Association .
doi:10.1037/11771-020 Arndt , J .
( 2012 ) .
A significant contributor to a meaningful cultural drama : Terror management research on the functions and implications of self- esteem .
In P. R. Shaver & M. Mikulincer ( Eds .
) , Meaning , mortality , and choice : The social psychology of existential concerns ( pp .
55–73 ) .
Washington , DC : American Psychological Association .
doi:10.1037/ 13748-003 Arndt , J. , Greenberg , J. , Simon , L. , Pyszczynski , T. , & Solomon , S. ( 1998 ) .
Terror management and se1f-awareness : Evidence that mortality sa- lience provokes avoidance of the self-focused state .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 11 , 1216 –1227 .
doi:10.1080/00207594 .2011.579127 Arndt , J. , Routledge , C. , Cox , C. R. , & Goldenberg , J. L. ( 2005 ) .
The worm at the core : A terror management perspective on the roots of psycho- logical dysfunction .
Applied and Preventive Psychology , 11 , 191–213 .
doi:10.1016/j.appsy.2005.07.002 T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
620 KESEBIR Baldwin , M. W. , & Wesley , R. ( 1996 ) .
Effects of existential anxiety and self-esteem on the perception of others .
Basic and Applied Social Psy- chology , 18 , 75–95 .
doi:10.1207/s15324834basp1801_7 Baumeister , R. F. ( 1991 ) .
Escaping the self : Alcoholism , spirituality , masochism , and other flights from the burden of selfhood .
New York , NY : Basic Books .
Baumeister , R. F. , Campbell , J. D. , Krueger , J. I. , & Vohs , K. D. ( 2003 ) .
Does high self-esteem cause better performance , interpersonal success , happiness , or healthier lifestyles ?
Psychological Science in the Public Interest , 4 , 1–44 .
doi:10.1111/1529-1006.01431 Baumeister , R. F. , Smart , L. , & Boden , J. M. ( 1996 ) .
Relation of threatened egotism to violence and aggression : The dark side of high self-esteem .
Psychological Review , 103 , 5–33 .
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.103.1.5 Baumeister , R. F. , Vohs , K. D. , & Tice , D. M. ( 2007 ) .
Strength model of self-control .
Current Directions in Psychological Science , 16 , 351–355 .
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00534.x Becker , E. ( 1971 ) .
The birth and death of meaning .
New York , NY : Free Press .
Becker , E. ( 1973 ) .
The denial of death .
New York , NY : Free Press .
Bellah , R. , Madsen , R. , Sullivan , W. , Swindler , A. , & Tipton , S. ( 1985 ) .
Habits of the heart : Individualism and commitment in American life .
Berkeley , CA : University of California Press .
Blaine , B. , & Crocker , J .
( 1993 ) .
Self-esteem and self-serving biases in reactions to positive and negative events : An integrative review .
In R. F. Baumeister ( Ed .
) , Self-esteem : The puzzle of low self-regard ( pp .
55– 85 ) .
Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum .
doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-8956-9_4 Brennan , K. A. , Clark , C. L. , & Shaver , P. R. ( 1998 ) .
Self-report measure- ment of adult attachment : An integrative overview .
Attachment theory and close relationships .
New York , NY : Guilford Press .
Brown , J. D. , & Marshall , M. A .
( 2001 ) .
Self-esteem and emotion : Some thoughts about feelings .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 27 , 575–584 .
doi:10.1177/0146167201275006 Brown , K. W. , & Ryan , R. M. ( 2003 ) .
The benefits of being present : Mindfulness and its role in psychological well-being .
Journal of Per- sonality and Social Psychology , 84 , 822–848 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514 .84.4.822 Burson , A. , Crocker , J. , & Mischkowski , D. ( 2012 ) .
Two types of value affirmation : Implications for self-control following social exclusion .
Social Psychological and Personality Science , 3 , 510–516 .
doi:10.1177/ 1948550611427773 Bushman , B. J. , & Baumeister , R. F. ( 1998 ) .
Threatened egotism , narcis- sism , self-esteem , and direct and displaced aggression : Does self-love or self-hate lead to violence ?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- ogy , 75 , 219–229 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.75.1.219 Campbell , W. K. , Bonacci , A. M. , Shelton , J. , Exline , J. J. , & Bushman , B. J .
( 2004 ) .
Psychological entitlement : Interpersonal consequences and validation of a new self-report measure .
Journal of Personality Assess- ment , 83 , 29–45 .
doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa8301_04 Chaves , M. ( 2011 ) .
American religion : Contemporary trends .
Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press .
Collins , J .
( 2001 ) .
Good to great : Why some companies make the leap .
.
.
and others don ’ t .
New York , NY : Harper Business .
Comte-Sponville , A .
( 2001 ) .
A small treatise on the great virtues ( C. Temerson , Trans . ) .
New York , NY : Metropolitan Books .
Crocker , J .
( 2008 ) .
From egosystem to ecosystem : Implications for learn- ing , relationships , and well-being .
In H. A. Wayment & J. J. Bauer ( Eds .
) , Transcending self-interest : Psychological explorations of the quiet ego ( pp .
63–72 ) .
Washington , DC : American Psychological Asso- ciation .
doi:10.1037/11771-006 Crocker , J. , Niiya , Y. , & Mischkowski , D. ( 2008 ) .
Why does writing about important values reduce defensiveness ?
Self-affirmation and the role of positive , other-directed feelings .
Psychological Science , 19 , 740–747 .
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02150.x Crocker , J. , & Park , L. E. ( 2004 ) .
The costly pursuit of self-esteem .
Psychological Bulletin , 130 , 392–414 .
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.130.3 .392 Crocker , J. , Thompson , L. L. , McGraw , K. M. , & Ingerman , C. ( 1987 ) .
Downward comparison , prejudice , and evaluations of others : Effects of self-esteem and threat .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 , 907–916 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.52.5.907 Davis , D. E. , Worthington , E. L. , Jr. , Hook , J. N. , Emmons , R. A. , Hill , P. C. , Bollinger , R. A. , & Van Tongeren , D. R. ( 2013 ) .
Humility and the development and repair of social bonds : Two longitudinal studies .
Self and Identity , 12 , 58–77 .
doi:10.1080/15298868.2011.636509 Dunning , D. ( 2005 ) .
Self-insight : Roadblocks and detours on the path to knowing thyself .
New York , NY : Psychology Press .
doi:10.4324/ 9780203337998 Emmons , R. A .
( 1999 ) .
The psychology of ultimate concerns : Motivation and spirituality in personality .
New York , NY : Guilford Press .
Exline , J. J .
( 2008 ) .
Taming the wild ego .
In H. A. Wayment & J. J. Bauer ( Eds .
) , Transcending self-interest : Psychological explorations of the quiet ego ( pp .
53–62 ) .
Washington , DC : American Psychological As- sociation .
doi:10.1037/11771-005 Exline , J. J. , & Geyer , A. L. ( 2004 ) .
Perceptions of humility : A preliminary study .
Self and Identity , 3 , 95–114 .
doi:10.1080/13576500342000077 Exline , J. J. , & Hill , P. C. ( 2012 ) .
Humility : A consistent and robust predictor of generosity .
Journal of Positive Psychology , 7 , 208–218 .
doi:10.1080/17439760.2012.671348 Gailliot , M. T. , Schmeichel , B. J. , & Baumeister , R. F. ( 2006 ) .
Self- regulatory processes defend against the threat of death : Effects of self-control depletion and trait self-control on thoughts and fears of dying .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 91 , 49–62 .
doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.91.1.49 Gilovich , T. ( 1991 ) .
How we know what isn ’ t so : The fallibility of human reason in everyday life .
New York , NY : Free Press .
Goldenberg , J. L. , McCoy , S. K. , Pyszczynski , T. , Greenberg , J. , & Solomon , S. ( 2000 ) .
The body as a source of self-esteem : The effect of mortality salience on identification with one ’ s body , interest in sex , and appearance monitoring .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 79 , 118–130 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.79.1.118 Greenberg , J. , Pyszczynski , T. , & Solomon , S. ( 1986 ) .
The causes and consequences of a need for self-esteem : A terror management theory .
In R. F. Baumeister ( Ed .
) , Public self and private self ( pp .
189–212 ) .
New York , NY : Springer-Verlag .
doi:10.1007/978-1-4613-9564-5_10 Greenberg , J. , Pyszczynski , T. , Solomon , S. , Rosenblatt , A. , Veeder , M. , Kirkland , S. , & Lyon , D. ( 1990 ) .
Evidence for terror management II : The effects of mortality salience on reactions to those who threaten or bolster the cultural worldview .
Journal of Personality and Social Psy- chology , 58 , 308–318 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.58.2.308 Greenberg , J. , Pyszczynski , T. , Solomon , S. , Simon , L. , & Breus , M. ( 1994 ) .
Role of consciousness and accessibility of death-related thoughts in mortality salience effects .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- ogy , 67 , 627–637 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.67.4.627 Greenberg , J. , Solomon , S. , Pyszczynski , T. , Rosenblatt , A. , Burling , J. , Lyon , D. , .
.
.
Pinel , E. ( 1992 ) .
Why do people need self-esteem ?
Converging evidence that self-esteem serves an anxiety-buffering func- tion .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 63 , 913–922 .
doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.63.6.913 Greenwald , A. G. ( 1980 ) .
The totalitarian ego : Fabrication and revision of personal history .
American Psychologist , 35 , 603–618 .
doi:10.1037/ 0003-066X.35.7.603 Greenwald , A. G. , & Farnham , S. D. ( 2000 ) .
Using the implicit association test to measure self-esteem and self-concept .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 79 , 1022–1038 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.79.6.1022 Harmon-Jones , E. , Simon , L. , Greenberg , J. , Pyszczynski , T. , Solomon , S. , & McGregor , H. ( 1997 ) .
Terror management theory and self-esteem : Evidence that increased self-esteem reduces mortality salience effects .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
621HUMILITY AS AN EXISTENTIAL ANXIETY BUFFER Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 72 , 24–36 .
doi:10.1037/ 0022-3514.72.1.24 Hayes , A. F. ( 2013 ) .
Introduction to mediation , moderation , and condi- tional process analysis : A regression-based approach .
New York , NY : Guilford Press .
Hayes , J. , Schimel , J. , Faucher , E. H. , & Williams , T. J .
( 2008 ) .
Evidence for the DTA hypothesis II : Threatening self-esteem increases death- thought accessibility .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 44 , 600–613 .
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2008.01.004 Hirschberger , G. ( 2006 ) .
Terror management and attributions of blame to innocent victims : Reconciling compassionate and defensive responses .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 91 , 832– 844. doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.91.5.832 Imhoff , R. , & Recker , J .
( 2012 ) .
Differentiating Islamophobia : Introducing a new scale to measure Islamoprejudice and Secular Islam Critique .
Political Psychology , 33 , 811– 824. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9221.2012 .00911.x Ingram , R. E. ( 1990 ) .
Self-focused attention in clinical disorders : Review and a conceptual model .
Psychological Bulletin , 107 , 156–176 .
doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.107.2.156 Kesebir , P. , Chiu , C.-Y. , & Pyszczynski , T. ( 2013 ) .
Self-transcending sacredness perception : An existential anxiety buffer .
Unpublished man- uscript , University of Colorado , Colorado Springs .
Kesebir , P. , & Kesebir , S. ( 2012 ) .
The cultural salience of moral character and virtue declined in twentieth century America .
Journal of Positive Psychology , 7 , 471–480 .
doi:10.1080/17439760.2012.715182 Kesebir , P. , & Pyszczynski , T. ( 2012 ) .
The role of death in life : Existential aspects of human motivation .
In R. Ryan ( Ed .
) , The Oxford handbook of human motivation ( pp .
43–64 ) .
New York , NY : Oxford University Press .
doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195399820.013.0004 LaBouff , J. P. , Rowatt , W. C. , Johnson , M. K. , Tsang , J. , & Willerton , G. M. ( 2012 ) .
Humble persons are more helpful than less humble persons : Evidence from three studies .
Journal of Positive Psychology , 7 , 16–29 .
doi:10.1080/17439760.2011.626787 Landau , M. J. , & Greenberg , J .
( 2006 ) .
Play it safe or go for the gold ?
A terror management perspective on self-enhancement and self-protective motives in risky decision making .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 32 , 1633–1645 .
doi:10.1177/0146167206292017 Landau , M. J. , Solomon , S. , Greenberg , J. , Cohen , F. , Pyszczynski , T. , Arndt , J. , .
.
.
Cook , A .
( 2004 ) .
Deliver us from evil : The effects of mortality salience and reminders of 9/11 on support for President George W. Bush .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 30 , 1136–1150 .
doi:10.1177/0146167204267988 Landrum , E. ( 2011 ) .
Measuring dispositional humility : A first approxima- tion .
Psychological Reports , 108 , 217–228 .
doi:10.2466/02.07.09.PR0 .108.1.217-228 Leary , M. R. ( 2004 ) .
The curse of the self : Self-awareness , egotism , and the quality of human life .
New York , NY : Oxford University Press .
doi : 10.1093/acprof : oso/9780195172423.001.0001 Leary , M. R. , Adams , C. E. , & Tate , E. B .
( 2006 ) .
Hypo-egoic self- regulation : Exercising self-control by diminishing the influence of the self .
Journal of Personality , 74 , 1803–1831 .
doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494 .2006.00429.x Leary , M. R. , & Guadagno , J .
( 2011 ) .
The role of hypo-egoic self- processes in optimal functioning and subjective well-being .
In K. Shel- don , T. B. Kashdan , & M. F. Steger ( Eds .
) , Designing positive psychol- ogy : Taking stock and moving forward ( pp .
135–146 ) .
New York , NY : Oxford University Press .
doi:10.1093/acprof : oso/9780195373585.003 .0009 Leary , M. R. , Tchividjian , L. R. , & Kraxberger , B. E. ( 1994 ) .
Self- presentation can be hazardous to your health : Impression management and health risk .
Health Psychology , 13 , 461–470 .
doi:10.1037/0278- 6133.13.6.461 Lester , D. , & Abdel-Khalek , A. M. ( 2003 ) .
The Collett–Lester Fear of Death Scale : A correction .
Death Studies , 27 , 81–85 .
doi:10.1080/ 07481180302873 Lewis , C. S. ( 2001 ) .
Mere Christianity .
Chicago , IL : Harper Collins .
( Original work published 1952 ) Marlowe , C. ( 1995 ) .
Doctor Faustus .
New York , NY : Dover .
( Original work published 1604 ) McGregor , H. A. , Lieberman , J. D. , Greenberg , J. , Solomon , S. , Arndt , J. , Simon , L. , & Pyszczynski , T. ( 1998 ) .
Terror management and aggres- sion : Evidence that mortality salience motivates worldview-threatening others .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 , 590–605 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.3.590 McGregor , I. , Gailliot , M. T. , Vasquez , N. , & Nash , K. A .
( 2007 ) .
Ideo- logical and personal zeal reactions to threat among people with high self-esteem : Motivated promotion focus .
Personality and Social Psy- chology Bulletin , 33 , 1587–1599 .
doi:10.1177/0146167207306280 McGregor , I. , & Jordan , C. H. ( 2007 ) .
The mask of zeal : Low implicit self-esteem and defensive extremism after self-threat .
Self and Identity , 6 , 223–237 .
doi:10.1080/15298860601115351 Mikulincer , M. , & Florian , V. ( 2000 ) .
Exploring individual differences in reactions to mortality salience : Does attachment style regulate terror management mechanisms ?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- ogy , 79 , 260–273 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.79.2.260 Mikulincer , M. , Florian , V. , & Hirschberger , G. ( 2003 ) .
The existential function of close relationships : Introducing death into the science of love .
Personality and Social Psychology Review , 7 , 20–40 .
doi:10.1207/ S15327957PSPR0701_2 Moore , C. , Detert , J. R. , Treviño , L. K. , Baker , V. L. , & Mayer , D. M. ( 2012 ) .
Why employees do bad things : Moral disengagement and un- ethical organizational behavior .
Personnel Psychology , 65 , 1–48 .
doi : 10.1111/j.1744-6570.2011.01237.x Myers , D. G. ( 2000 ) .
The American paradox : Spiritual hunger in an age of plenty .
New Haven , CT : Yale University Press .
Neff , K. ( 2003 ) .
Self-compassion : An alternative conceptualization of a healthy attitude toward oneself .
Self and Identity , 2 , 85–101 .
doi : 10.1080/15298860309032 Niemiec , C. P. , Brown , K. W. , Kashdan , T. B. , Cozzolino , P. J. , Breen , W. E. , Levesque-Bristol , C. , & Ryan , R. M. ( 2010 ) .
Being present in the face of existential threat : The role of trait mindfulness in reducing defensive responses to mortality salience .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 99 , 344–365 .
doi:10.1037/a0019388 Ogilvie , D. M. , Cohen , F. , & Solomon , S. ( 2008 ) .
The undesired self : Deadly connotations .
Journal of Research in Personality , 42 , 564–576 .
doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2007.07.012 Owens , B. P. , & Hekman , D. R. ( 2012 ) .
Modeling how to grow : An inductive examination of humble leader behaviors , contingencies , and outcomes .
Academy of Management Journal , 55 , 787–818 .
doi:10.5465/ amj.2010.0441 Paulhus , D. L. ( 1988 ) .
Assessing self-deception and impression manage- ment in self-reports : The Balanced Inventory of Desirable Responding .
Unpublished manual , University of British Columbia , Vancouver , Can- ada .
Peters , A. , & Rowatt , W. C. ( 2011 ) .
Associations between dispositional humility and social relationship quality .
Psychology , 2 , 155–161 .
doi : 10.4236/psych.2011.23025 Peterson , C. , & Seligman , M. E. P. ( 2004 ) .
Character strengths and virtues : A handbook and classification .
Washington , DC : American Psychological Association .
Putnam , R. D. ( 2000 ) .
Bowling alone : The collapse and revival of Amer- ican community .
New York , NY : Simon & Schuster .
Pyszczynski , T. , Abdollahi , A. , Solomon , S. , Greenberg , J. , & Weise , D. ( 2006 ) .
Mortality salience , martyrdom , and military might : The Great Satan versus the Axis of Evil .
Personality and Social Psychology Bul- letin , 32 , 525–538 .
doi:10.1177/0146167205282157 T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
622 KESEBIR Pyszczynski , T. , Greenberg , J. , Solomon , S. , Arndt , J. , & Schimel , J .
( 2004 ) .
Why do people need self-esteem : A theoretical and empirical review .
Psychological Bulletin , 130 , 435–468 .
doi:10.1037/0033-2909 .130.3.435 Pyszczynski , T. , & Kesebir , P. ( 2011 ) .
Anxiety buffer disruption theory : A terror management account of posttraumatic stress disorder .
Anxiety , Stress & Coping : An International Journal , 24 , 3–26 .
doi:10.1080/ 10615806.2010.517524 Pyszczynski , T. , & Kesebir , P. ( 2013 ) .
An existential perspective on the need for self-esteem .
In V. Zeigler-Hill ( Ed .
) , Current issues in social psychology : Self-esteem ( pp .
124–144 ) .
New York , NY : Psychology Press .
Rosenberg , M. ( 1965 ) .
Society and the adolescent self-image .
Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press .
Rowatt , W. C. , Powers , C. , Targhetta , V. , Comer , J. , Kennedy , S. , & LaBouff , J .
( 2006 ) .
Development and initial validation of an implicit measure of humility relative to arrogance .
Journal of Positive Psychol- ogy , 1 , 198–211 .
doi:10.1080/17439760600885671 Sandage , S. J. , & Moe , S. P. ( 2011 ) .
Narcissism and spirituality .
In W. K. Campbell & J. D. Miller ( Eds .
) , The handbook of narcissism and narcissistic personality disorder ( pp .
410–419 ) .
New York , NY : Wiley .
Schmeichel , B. J. , Gailliot , M. T. , MacGregor , I. , Filardo , E.-A. , Gitter , S. , & Baumeister , R. F. ( 2009 ) .
Terror management theory and self-esteem revisited : The roles of implicit and explicit self-esteem in mortality salience effects .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 96 , 1077–1087 .
doi:10.1037/a0015091 Sedikides , C. ( 1993 ) .
Assessment , enhancement , and verification determi- nants of the self-evaluation process .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 , 317–338 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.65.2.317 Shelley , M. W. ( 1994 ) .
Frankenstein .
New York , NY : Dover .
( Original work published 1818 ) Steele , C. M. ( 1988 ) .
The psychology of self-affirmation : Sustaining the integrity of the self .
In L. Berkowitz ( Ed .
) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol .
21 , pp .
261–302 ) .
San Diego , CA : Academic Press .
doi:10.1016/S0065-2601 ( 08 ) 60229-4 Strachan , E. , Schimel , J. , Arndt , J. , Williams , T. , Solomon , S. , Pyszczyn- ski , T. , & Greenberg , J .
( 2007 ) .
Terror mismanagement : Evidence that mortality salience exacerbates phobic and compulsive behaviors .
Per- sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 33 , 1137–1151 .
doi:10.1177/ 0146167207303018 Tangney , J. P. ( 2000 ) .
Humility : Theoretical perspectives , empirical find- ings , and directions for future research .
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology , 19 , 70–82 .
doi:10.1521/jscp.2000.19.1.70 Tangney , J. P. ( 2002 ) .
Humility .
In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez ( Eds .
) , Handbook of positive psychology ( pp .
411–419 ) .
New York , NY : Ox- ford University Press .
Taubman Ben-Ari , O. , Florian , V. , & Mikulincer , M. ( 1999 ) .
The impact of mortality salience on reckless driving : A test of terror management mechanisms .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 76 , 35–45 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.76.1.35 Taylor , S. E. , & Brown , J. D. ( 1988 ) .
Illusion and well-being : A social psychological perspective on mental health .
Psychological Bulletin , 103 , 193–210 .
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.103.2.193 Taylor , S. E. , Lerner , J. S. , Sherman , D. K. , Sage , R. M. , & McDowell , N. K. ( 2003 ) .
Portrait of the self-enhancer : Well adjusted and well liked or maladjusted and friendless ?
Journal of Personality and Social Psy- chology , 84 , 165–176 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.1.165 Templer , D. I .
( 1970 ) .
The construction and validation of a Death Anxiety Scale .
Journal of General Psychology , 82 , 165–177 .
doi:10.1080/ 00221309.1970.9920634 Tesser , A .
( 2001 ) .
On the plasticity of self-defense .
Current Directions in Psychological Science , 10 , 66–69 .
doi:10.1111/1467-8721.00117 Tracy , J. L. , & Robins , R. W. ( 2007 ) .
The nature of pride .
In J. L. Tracy , R. W. Robins , & J. P. Tangney ( Eds .
) , The self-conscious emotions : Theory and research ( pp .
263–282 ) .
New York , NY : Guilford Press .
Tsukayama , E. , Duckworth , A. L. , & Kim , B. E. ( 2012 ) .
Resisting every- thing but temptation : Evidence and an explanation for domain-specific impulsivity .
European Journal of Personality , 26 , 318 –334 .
doi : 10.1002/per.841 Twenge , J. M. ( 2006 ) .
Generation me : Why today ’ s young Americans are more confident , assertive , entitled—and more miserable than ever be- fore .
New York , NY : Free Press .
Twenge , J. M. , & Campbell , W. K. ( 2009 ) .
The narcissism epidemic : Living in the age of entitlement .
New York , NY : Free Press .
Vera , D. , & Rodriguez-Lopez , A .
( 2004 ) .
Strategic virtues : Humility as a source of competitive advantage .
Organizational Dynamics , 33 , 393– 408. doi:10.1016/j.orgdyn.2004.09.006 Vess , M. , & Arndt , J .
( 2008 ) .
The nature of death and the death of nature : The impact of mortality salience on environmental concern .
Journal of Research in Personality , 42 , 1376–1380 .
doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2008.04.007 Watson , D. , Clark , L. A. , & Tellegen , A .
( 1988 ) .
Development and vali- dation of brief measures of positive and negative affect : The PANAS scales .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 , 1063–1070 .
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.54.6.1063 Wayment , H. A. , & Bauer , J. J .
( Eds . ) .
( 2008 ) .
Transcending self-interest : Psychological explorations of the quiet ego .
Washington , DC : American Psychological Association .
doi:10.1037/11771-000 Worthington , E. L. ( 2007 ) .
Humility : The quiet virtue .
West Consho- hocken , PA : Templeton Foundation Press .
Yalom , I .
( 1980 ) .
Existential psychotherapy .
New York , NY : Basic Books .
Received March 19 , 2013 Revision received December 30 , 2013 Accepted January 7 , 2014 T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
623HUMILITY AS AN EXISTENTIAL ANXIETY BUFFER
