Kupor_JournConsRes_2018_QpK.pdf
a2zs7YVPY4AJBw0sjnE6_.vwcesm-Kupor_JournConsRes_2018_QpK.pdf.plain.html

The Effect of an Interruption on Risk Decisions DANIELLA M. KUPOR WENDY LIU ON AMIR Interruptions during consumer decision making are ubiquitous .
In seven studies , we examine the consequences of a brief interruption during a financial risk deci- sion .
We identify a fundamental feature inherent in an interruption ’ s temporal structure—a repeat exposure to the decision stimuli—and find that this re- exposure reduces decision stimuli ’ s subjective novelty .
This reduced novelty in turn reduces decision makers ’ apprehension and increases the amount of risk they take in a wide range of risky financial decision contexts .
Consistent with our theoretical framework , this interruption effect disappears when a stimulus ’ s sub- jective novelty is restored after an interruption .
We further find that these conse- quences are often unique to interruptions are often do not result from other inter- ventions ( e.g. , time pressure and elongated thinking ) ; this is because an interruption ’ s unique temporal structure ( which results in a repeat exposure to the decision stimuli ) underlies its consequences .
Our findings shed light on how and when interruptions during decision making can influence risk taking .
Keywords : risk taking , decision making , interruption Individuals are constantly interrupted .
For example , of-fice workers are interrupted every 5 minutes during their work , and undergraduates are interrupted every 2 minutes while they study ( Benbunan-Fich and Truman 2009 ; Jackson , Dawson , and Wilson 2001 ) .
Often such interrup- tions are relatively short , and people go back to their tasks after these brief moments of discontinuity .
However , do these interruptions nonetheless affect people ’ s subsequent behaviors on the interrupted task ?
For example , consider a consumer who is deciding how much money to invest in a stock , but is interrupted by a phone call .
When she returns to the decision , will she make a different decision than if she had not been interrupted ?
Given the ubiquity of interruptions , researchers have long been interested in their effects on behavior .
We extend this literature by proposing a theory of one fundamental way in which interruptions can affect decisions—through repeat exposure and subjective novelty reduction—and test novel consequences of interruptions predicted by this theory .
TYPES OF INTERRUPTIONS Interruptions to information processing and decision mak- ing can take place in many forms .
Previous research has ex- amined various types of interruptions that differ in their temporal sequence .
One type of interruption is an event that terminates a task before it is completed ; that is , an individ- ual has no ability to return to the task even after the interrup- tion concludes .
We call this type of interruption a “ premature termination. ” Premature terminations heighten consumers ’ desire to return to the interrupted task , which increases activation of information relevant to the inter- rupted task and prompts an unsatisfied need for closure that Daniella Kupor ( dkupor @ bu.edu ) is an assistant professor in market- ing at Boston University , 595 Commonwealth Avenue , Boston , MA 02215 , Wendy Liu ( wendy.liu @ rady.ucsd.edu ) is an associate professor in marketing at the University of California San Diego , 9500 Gilman Dr , La Jolla , CA 92093 , and On Amir ( oamir @ ucsd.edu ) is an associate professor in marketing at the University of California San Diego , 9500 Gilman Dr , La Jolla , CA 92093 .
Darren Dahl served as editor and Simona Botti served as associate editor for this article .
Advance Access publication August 23 , 2017 VC The Author 2017 .
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of Consumer Research , Inc. All rights reserved .
For permissions , please e-mail : journals.permissions @ oup.com Vol .
44 2018 DOI : 10.1093/jcr/ucx092 1205 D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 spills over onto other tasks ( Goschke and Kuhl 1993 ; Kupor , Reich , and Shiv 2015 ; Marsh , Hicks , and Bink 1998 ; Savitsky , Medvec , and Gilovich 1997 ; Zeigarnik 1927 ) .
An interruption with a different temporal structure—and thus different consequences—is one that temporarily pauses the delivery of a task ’ s information before it is fully revealed .
We term this type of interruption an “ information suspension. ” An interruption with this temporal structure sparks curiosity about the remaining interrupted content , and thus increases processing of the remaining content when it resumes ( Kupor and Tormala 2015 ) .
Importantly , this increase in curiosity occurs only when an interruption intercedes before the decision information is fully revealed—when an interruption occurs after the complete information delivery , interruptions no longer boost curios- ity and processing ( Kupor and Tormala 2015 ) .
Another interruption with a different temporal structure—and which thus unleashes different con- sequences—is one that occurs after the delivery of infor- mation is complete but before a consumer has formulated her decision , and whose conclusion allows the decision maker to resume the interrupted task .
Thus , no new infor- mation is introduced after the person resumes her decision post-interruption .
We call this type of interruption a “ decision suspension. ” The current research focuses on how decision suspensions affect decision outcomes .
In par- ticular , we identify a fundamental feature inherent in this interruption ’ s temporal structure—a repeat exposure to the decision stimuli—and illuminate the manner in which this feature systematically alters decision making .
For ease of exposition , in the remainder of this article we refer to a decision suspension as an “ interruption. ” EFFECT OF AN INTERRUPTION ON RISK DECISIONS Decision makers often experience the following se- quence : when they are first exposed to decision informa- tion , they review the information , deliberate , and make a decision .
When they are uninterrupted , the responses en- gendered in one stage ( i.e. , information processing ) are in- put into the next stages ( i.e. , deliberation and choice ; Bettman 1979 ) .
However , an interruption changes this sequence .
In par- ticular , an interruption introduces a second instance of expo- sure to the decision information .
That is , when consumers return to the decision stimuli after an interruption , they ex- perience a second exposure to the same decision stimuli .
They then review this information until they make their de- cision .
In short , an interruption changes the decision-making process from an initial exposure-processing-choice sequence to an initial exposure-processing-interruption-second expo- sure-reprocessing-choice sequence .
Does an interruption alter the decision outcome ?
The answer to this question hinges on whether the second expo- sure and subsequent processing generates the same re- sponse to the decision information as the initial exposure and processing .
If it is the same , then an interruption will not alter the decision outcome ; however , if the response evoked by an initial exposure versus a post-interruption re- exposure differs , then the decision outcome may also differ .
We posit that the response evoked by an initial exposure versus a post-interruption re-exposure differs substantially .
Specifically , research shows that the first exposure to a novel stimulus instinctively evokes apprehension ( Berlyne et al .
1963 ; Carrillo-Diaz et al .
2012 ; Zajonc 1968 ) .
Importantly , it is the mere novelty of a stimulus that prompts this apprehension—thus , this apprehension occurs even when the stimulus content is neutral ( e.g. , nonsense letter strings ; Winkielman et al .
2003 ; Zajonc 1968 ) .
However , if no negative consequences occur during the ini- tial encounter , a second exposure to the same stimulus evokes significantly less apprehension ( Berlyne et al .
1963 ; Zebrowitz and Zhang 2012 ) .
Drawing on this literature , we predict that when consum- ers initially encounter a novel risk decision , they similarly experience novelty-induced apprehension .
However , hold- ing constant the duration between the initial exposure and final decision , we theorize that these initially high levels of apprehension fade more quickly during interrupted expo- sure than during continuous exposure .
Inherent in an inter- ruption ’ s temporal structure is that it breaks consumers ’ exposure to the decision stimuli , and previous theories sug- gest that the intensity of affect experienced upon exposure to emotionally evocative stimuli declines more rapidly when exposure to that stimulus is terminated versus when it continues ( Solomon and Corbit 1974 ; Solomon 1980 ) .
As a result , when an interruption breaks consumers ’ expo- sure to a novel risk context , it may cause the initial high levels of apprehension sparked by consumers ’ first expo- sure to the risk context to more rapidly degrade than they would during a continuous exposure .
When interrupted consumers are subsequently re-exposed to the decision context after the interruption , it no longer appears brand new , and this ease of recognition evokes less apprehension than the initial exposure .
We theorize that the resulting milder apprehension consequently drives interrupted con- sumers ’ decisions .
Importantly , whereas this subjective ex- perience of ease of recognition occurs in the first moments in which a perceiver is re-exposed to a previously viewed stimulus , it is less likely to occur when an individual is in the midst of continuously perceiving a stimulus ( Jacoby , Kelley , and Dywan 1989 ) .
Thus , because an interruption breaks consumers ’ exposure to a risk context and introdu- ces a moment of re-exposure ( which is absent in continu- ous exposure ) , we theorize that the high levels of apprehension prompted by consumers ’ first exposure to a 1206 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 novel risk stimulus fade more rapidly among interrupted ( vs. uninterrupted ) decision makers , and thus are less likely to influence interrupted decisions .
Instead , we predict that the reduced apprehension at re-exposure is more likely to influence interrupted consumers ’ decisions .
Because appre- hension is a primary driver of risk aversion ( Loewenstein et al .
2001 ; Song and Schwarz 2009 ) , we further posit that an interruption during a risk decision therefore increases risk taking .
Of note , we focus our investigation on risky financial de- cision making .
We focus on these decisions not only be- cause they are heavily influenced by decision makers ’ apprehension ( Guiso , Sapienza , and Zingales 2013 ; Loewenstein et al .
2001 ; Schulreich , Gerhardt , and Heekeren 2016 ) , but also because of their immediate rele- vance to everyday consumer contexts—indeed , consumers ’ financial welfare depends on which financial risks they take and avoid ( Vlaev , Chanter , and Stewart 2009 ; Yeung and Morris 2001 ) .
In the General Discussion , we explore the possibility that the proposed phenomenon might extend to other types of risks .
RELATION OF CURRENT THEORIZING TO PRIOR RESEARCH Our theorizing expands beyond research offering initial evidence that interruptions can increase risk taking in reward-probability tradeoffs ( e.g. , choices between a large gain with a small probability vs. a small gain with a large probability ) .
Specifically , Liu ( 2008 ) found that when con- sumers face reward-probability tradeoffs , interruptions can reduce consumers ’ attention to feasibility attributes ( i.e. , information relevant to consumers ’ secondary goals , which is probability information in the context of risk decisions ) but does not alter consumers ’ attention to desirability attributes ( i.e. , information relevant to consumers ’ primary goals , which is magnitude information in the context of risk decisions ; study 1 in Liu 2008 ) .
Thus , Liu ( 2008 ) documented a cognitive outcome of interruptions : reduced attention to feasibility attributes .
We argue that this earlier finding is one ( but not the only ) downstream consequence of our theory .
Indeed , Liu ( 2008 ) speculated that—but did not empirically examine whether—the reason interruptions reduced attention to feasibility attributes was because con- sumers recognized the decision stimulus during their re- exposure to it after the interruption .
Thus , the effect shown in Liu ( 2008 ) stems from the same fundamental feature of an interruption we theorize here ( i.e. , an interruption- induced re-exposure ) .
While Liu ( 2008 ) theorized that this re-exposure has cognitive consequences , we theorize that it also has af- fective consequences ( i.e. , a reduction in apprehension ) .
Investigating this possibility provides crucial insight into the architecture of interrupted decision making .
This is because when an event can produce both affective and cognitive consequences , affective consequences are more primary ( i.e. , occur sooner ; Armony et al .
1997 ; LeDoux 1996 ) and are more dominant ( Loewenstein et al .
2001 ) .
Drawing on this literature , the affective consequence that we posit is likely a first-order—and more consequen- tial—outcome of interruptions .
Further , due to the influ- ence of affect on a wide array of risk decisions , this affective consequence predicts that interruptions impact numerous types of decisions that the prior cognitive the- ory does not .
For example , consider risk decisions involving options with the same probabilities but different outcomes , such as this risk : option A offers a 50 % chance of $ 1 and a 50 % chance of $ 2 , and option B offers a 50 % chance of $ 0 and a 50 % chance of $ 3 .
An examination of this decision through the lens of Liu ’ s ( 2008 ) cognitive focus theory suggests that an interruption would have no impact ; after all , the outcomes contained in both options are equally fea- sible ( e.g. , probable ) , and the decision entails a tradeoff be- tween different levels of desirability ( which prior research reveals is uninfluenced by interruptions ; study 1 in Liu 2008 ) .
In contrast , our theoretical framework suggests that an interruption alters this decision by decreasing apprehension .
Because reduced apprehension increases choices of riskier options ( i.e. , options that have a larger outcome spread ; Bernanke 1983 ) , our theorizing suggests that an interruption increases choices of option B .
Another common type of risk decision involves gain- loss tradeoffs ( e.g. , risks that offer a chance of a gain but also come with a chance of a loss ) .
Neither preventing losses nor accruing gains is a feasibility concern ( i.e. , be- cause both are relevant to outcomes ’ content rather than their probability ; Trope and Liberman 2003 ) .
Rather , obtaining gains and preventing losses are two primary goals , and their relative prominence varies by person and context ( Carver and White 1994 ; Rothman and Updegraff 2010 ; Thaler et al .
1997 ) .
Thus , a cognitive shift in atten- tion away from feasibility would not reliably influence de- cision making in this context , whereas an affective mechanism of reduced apprehension predicts greater risk taking .
Furthermore , an affective mechanism also predicts greater risk taking when risks ’ parameters are ambiguous ( i.e. , when risks ’ outcomes and probabilities are not pre- cisely specified ; Johnson and Slovic 1995 ) .
When risk parameters are ambiguous , people often rely on affective ( vs. cognitive ) inputs to guide their decision making ( Finucane and Holup 2006 ; Hsu et al .
2005 ; Sayegh , Anthony , and Perrewé 2004 ) .
Thus , extant literature reveals that affective inputs ( e.g. , reduced apprehension ) are more likely to operate in such contexts than are cogni- tive inputs .
Therefore , the affective mechanism that we propose suggests that interruptions can increase risk taking KUPOR , LIU , AND AMIR 1207 D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 in a much wider range of risk contexts than does the previ- ously documented cognitive mechanism .
In sum , we propose and test a theoretical framework that illuminates a fundamental feature of interruptions—a repeat exposure to decision stimuli—and we examine its downstream consequences .
Further , our theory makes novel and broader predictions about interruptions ’ effect on risky decisions that were not predicted by prior nar- rower theorizing centering on interruptions ’ impact on cog- nitive attention .
Thus , our research provides a more comprehensive understanding of interruptions ’ effects on decision making .
INTERRUPTIONS VERSUS OTHER DECISION INTERVENTIONS Interruptions are not the only events that can intervene on decision making processes .
For example , distractions also frequently intervene during decision making .
Distractions are events that occur contemporaneously with a decision process ( Bodenhausen 1990 ; Roch et al .
2000 ; Shiv and Fedorikhin 2002 ) .
Time pressure—another com- mon form of external interference—artificially reduces the amount of time that consumers can devote to their deci- sions ( Finucane et al .
2000 ; Maule and Svenson 1993 ) .
A third form of intervention does the opposite—instead of hastening the decision , it forcefully extends the amount of time that a consumer spends on a task beyond what he or she naturally would .
In the current research , we not only examine our predic- tion that interruptions increase financial risk taking by re- ducing novelty and thus apprehension , but we also examine whether this outcome is a unique consequence of interruptions , or whether it similarly results from these other decision interventions .
Our theoretical framework predicts the former .
As previously noted , we theorize that the interruption effect stems from the unique temporal structure of an interruption ( which includes a repeated ex- posure to the decision stimuli ) , and this temporal structure is frequently absent in these other disruptors .
Thus , we ex- pect the effect of an interruption on risk decisions to often be differentiable from the effects of other types of disruptors .
Further , to the best of our knowledge , previous research has not examined the impact of elongated thinking on risk taking , and initial evidence suggests that cognitive load and extreme time pressure reduce risk taking ( Whitney , Rinehart , and Hinson 2008 ; Suri and Monroe 2003 ; but see Franco-Watkins , Pashler , and Rickard 2006 for reinterpre- tation ) .
Thus , while we predict that an interruption increases risk taking , we have no reason to expect that cog- nitive load , elongated thinking , or time pressure will in- crease risk taking .
OVERVIEW OF STUDIES We present seven studies that test the proposed theoreti- cal framework in the context of financial risk taking .
Studies 1A–1D examine the effect of an interruption on fi- nancial risk taking across different types of risks , and find that interruptions increase risk taking by reducing appre- hension .
Study 2 examines the critical role of stimuli nov- elty reduction in driving this effect .
Finally , studies 3A and 3B examine whether cognitive load , time pressure , or elon- gated thinking contributes to these results .
Of note , we focus our empirical examination on momen- tary , single , and affectively neutral interruptions .
We focus on momentary interruptions because we suspect that there may be a threshold after which an interrupted stimulus continues to be perceived as subjectively novel upon re- exposure ; this threshold likely depends on the limits of decision makers ’ long-term and working memory .
Also important , we focus on affectively neutral interruptions because interruptions that amplify apprehension ( e.g. , an interruption by one ’ s demanding boss ) , dampen apprehen- sion ( e.g. , an interruption by one ’ s supportive colleague ) , or create other emotions may also influence risk taking and thus confound our investigation .
Finally , we examine the impact of a single interruption because frequent interrup- tions can induce negative affect ( whereas a single brief in- terruption is less likely to ; Zijlstra et al .
1999 ) , and negative affect alters risk decisions ( Raghunathan and Pham 1999 ; Wright and Bower 1992 ) .
Focusing our inves- tigation within these parameters enables us to distill the im- pact of a “ mere interruption ” ( absent confounding influences ) on risk taking , and thus builds a foundation on which future research can examine how adjusting these parameters may alter an interruption ’ s consequences .
STUDY 1 Studies 1A–1D test the reach of interruptions ’ influence on risk taking across four different types of financial risks .
Studies 1A and 1B examine gain-loss conflicts that involve a continuous willingness-to-risk response mode and a bi- nary response mode , respectively .
Study 1C examines the effect of an interruption in a gain-gain conflict ( i.e. , a deci- sion involving options with the same probabilities but dif- ferent outcomes ) .
As previously described , gain-loss conflicts and gain-gain conflicts do not involve feasibility tradeoffs ; thus , a cognitive shift in attention away from fea- sibility considerations would not influence risk taking in these contexts .
Study 1D further generalizes the proposed interruption effect to a financial risk context in which the risk representation is ambiguous ( i.e. , the risk ’ s probabili- ties and outcomes are not precisely specified ) , and directly tests the mediating role of an interruption-induced reduc- tion in subjective novelty leading to reduced apprehension .
1208 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 STUDY 1A Study 1A tests an interruption ’ s influence on financial risk taking in a gain-loss conflict .
Further , this study uses a decision with real monetary incentives in which every par- ticipant ’ s payment hinged on his or her risk decision .
Method Two hundred one participants ( mean age ¼ 34.2 years , 109 males ) recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk par- ticipated in an online experiment in exchange for monetary payment .
All participants completed an incentive- compatible risky decision ( adapted from Charness , Gneezy , and Imas 2013 ; Gneezy and Potters 1997 ) and a filler task .
In this and all studies , all participants learned that one goal of the study was to investigate multitasking , and that they therefore might be prompted to switch be- tween different tasks during the progression of the study session ; to that end , participants were instructed to simply follow the study instructions throughout the session .
Participants randomly assigned to the interruption condi- tion viewed the risk task on the survey ’ s first page .
When they reached the bottom of the page , they encountered an instruction informing them that they would return to this decision later in the survey .
This instruction was accompa- nied with an arrow ; when participants clicked it , they were presented with the filler task on the next survey page .
After participants completed the filler task , they clicked an arrow that returned them to the risk decision information .
This time , they were able to finish making the decision ( and the information was followed by an empty response box in which participants could enter their decision ) .
Thus , partic- ipants ’ decision in the interruption condition was inter- rupted .
Of note , this interruption procedure ( whereby the interruption commenced after each participant viewed all of the decision information , rather than at the same fixed time for all participants ) ensured that the interruption inter- ceded after participants had been exposed to the complete risk information .
In study 1 , we recorded the duration par- ticipants viewed the decision information in order to statis- tically control in the analysis for any effect of natural variations in time spent on the task .
Moreover , in study 3 , we manipulate exposure duration to further empirically ex- amine whether it underlies an interruption ’ s impact on risk taking .
In contrast to participants in the interruption condition , participants in the no interruption condition completed the filler task prior to starting the risky decision , thereby equat- ing any filler task effects between conditions .
After partici- pants in the no interruption condition completed the filler task , they viewed the risk information on the next survey page , and entered their decision into an empty response box at the bottom of this page .
Thus , uninterrupted partici- pants made their decision without interruption .
In the filler task , participants viewed four landscape pho- tographs ( depicting mountains , a field of flowers , a beach , and a grassy meadow ) , and were asked to rate their liking of each photograph on separate seven-point scales ( 1 : Not at all ; 7 : Very much ) .
In the risky decision , participants read that they had been given 150 points , which could translate into addi- tional payment depending on their decision .
Specifically , they read that they could invest any portion of their endowed points ( between 0 and 150 points , inclusive ) in a risky option .
They learned that there was a 50 % chance that the investment would be successful , in which event they would receive 2.5 times the amount they chose to in- vest ; if the investment was unsuccessful , they would lose the amount invested .
They further learned that at the end of the survey a random-number generator would determine whether their investment was successful , and they would be paid $ .01 for each point they had .
Thus , all participants received a payout according to their investment decisions .
Participants entered their decision into an empty field .
Finally , a random-number generator determined the invest- ment outcome for each participant , and participants were paid accordingly .
Results and Discussion As predicted , participants in the interruption condition invested more points ( which converted to money ) in the risky option ( M ¼ 79.76 , SE¼ 4.05 ) than participants in the no interruption condition ( M ¼ 67.40 , SE¼ 4.27 ) , t ( 199 ) ¼ 2.10 , p ¼ .037 ( Cohen ’ s d ¼ .30 ) .
Analysis of the time data revealed that participants in the no interruption condition viewed the decision information for an average of 58.09 ( SE¼ 4.78 ) seconds , while participants in the interruption condition viewed the decision information for an average of 68.20 ( SE¼ 3.36 ) seconds ( i.e. , 42.00 seconds [ SE¼ 2.32 seconds ] before the interruption , and 26.20 seconds [ SE¼ 1.91 seconds ] after the interrup- tion ) ; these durations marginally differed , t ( 199 ) ¼ 1.73 , p ¼ .084 .
However , most relevant to the current theorizing , further analysis revealed that the effect of condition on risk taking remained significant when we controlled for expo- sure duration , F ( 1 , 198 ) ¼ 5.83 , p ¼ .017 .
Thus , study 1A suggests that interruptions can increase financial risk tak- ing , and that exposure duration does not drive this effect .
Nevertheless , in study 3 we directly manipulate exposure duration to further empirically examine whether exposure duration accounts for the impact of an interruption on risk taking .
KUPOR , LIU , AND AMIR 1209 D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 STUDY 1B This study tests the effect of an interruption on financial risk decisions with a gain-loss conflict in a binary choice setting .
Method Two hundred one participants ( mean age ¼ 34.7 years , 97 males ) from Amazon Mechanical Turk participated in an online experiment in exchange for monetary payment .
All participants made a risky financial decision .
Participants were randomly assigned to an interruption condition or a no interruption condition , and the interrup- tion was manipulated as in study 1A .
Participants imagined that they had been given $ 50 , and that they were choosing whether or not to invest it in a risky option .
Specifically , the risky option had a 10 % chance of success , and yielded 20 times their $ 50 ( i.e. , $ 1,000 ) if it succeeded .
If it failed , they would lose their $ 50 .
Participants chose between keeping their $ 50 or inves- ting it in the risky option .
Results and Discussion As predicted , interrupted participants more often chose to take the risk ( 56.9 % ) than did uninterrupted participants ( 35.4 % ; v2 ( df ¼ 1 , N¼ 201 ) ¼ 9.35 , p ¼ .002 ; Cohen ’ s d ¼ .43 ) .
Thus , conceptually replicating study 1A , study 1B found that an interruption increases financial risk taking in a gain-loss conflict with a binary choice mode .
STUDY 1C Study 1C tests the effect of an interruption in a financial risk context involving a gain-gain conflict ( i.e. , a risky choice between two options that yield different non-nega- tive magnitudes with the same probability ) .
In particular , participants faced a choice between an option that offered a 50 % chance of $ 4 and a 50 % chance of $ 7 , or an option that offered a 50 % chance of $ 0 and a 50 % chance of $ 18 .
Study 1C therefore examines another financial risk context in which feasibility tradeoffs are absent ( and thus in which prior research would not predict an effect of an interruption on risk taking ) .
In contrast , and as previously noted , our theoretical framework predicts that an interruption increases risk taking ( e.g. , choices of options with larger outcome spreads , Bernanke 1983 ; Loewenstein et al .
2001 ) by reducing apprehension .
Study 1C employs a mediation design to directly test for the role of apprehension in driv- ing the interruption effect .
Method Two hundred one participants ( mean age ¼ 36.3 years , 102 males ) on Amazon Mechanical Turk participated in an online experiment in exchange for monetary payment .
All participants faced a risky decision between two options : option A offered a 50 % chance of $ 4 and a 50 % chance of $ 7 , and option B offered a 50 % chance of $ 0 and a 50 % chance of $ 18 .
Participants were randomly assigned to be interrupted or not , and the interruption was manipulated as in study 1A .
After participants entered their decision ( by selecting a radio button labeled either “ Option A ” or “ Option B ” ) , we assessed participants ’ apprehension by asking them the fol- lowing question : While making your decision , how appre- hensive did you feel about the situation ?
Participants responded on a seven-point scale ( 1 : Not at all ; 7 : Very much ) .
Results and Discussion Analysis revealed that interrupted participants chose option B more frequently ( 51.5 % ) than uninterrupted par- ticipants ( 32.7 % ) , v2 ( df ¼ 1 , N¼ 201 ) ¼ 7.28 , p ¼ .007 ( Cohen ’ s d ¼ .39 ) .
Moreover , interrupted participants felt less apprehensive ( M ¼ 3.74 , SE ¼ .21 ) than uninterrupted participants ( M ¼ 4.36 , SE ¼ .19 ) , t ( 199 ) ¼ 2.18 , p ¼ .030 ( Cohen ’ s d ¼ .31 ) .
Further consistent with our theorizing , a mediation model with bootstrapping ( Hayes 2013 ) revealed that the interruption increased risk taking through reduced apprehension ( 95 % CI : .0047 to .1598 ; see figure 1 ) .
Thus , reduced apprehension increased financial risk taking in a context without feasibility tradeoffs .
STUDY 1D In study 1D we test the interruption effect in yet another risk context—one in which the risk is ambiguous ( e.g. , the risk ’ s probabilities and outcomes are not precisely speci- fied ) .
As previously noted , when risk parameters are am- biguous , people are more likely to resort to feelings to make their decisions because the information is difficult to assess precisely ( Finucane and Holup 2006 ; Hsu et al .
2005 ; Sayegh et al .
2004 ) .
Consequently , the proposed re- duction in apprehension may be a key input into such deci- sions .
Also important , in this study we employ a mediation design to directly examine the theorized role of reduced subjective novelty after an interruption as the driver of re- duced apprehension and thus greater risk taking .
Method Two hundred four participants ( mean age ¼ 33.2 years , 93 males ) from Amazon Mechanical Turk participated in an online experiment in exchange for monetary payment .
The interruption was inserted via the procedure described in study 1A , but to further test the robustness of the inter- ruption effect , we administered a different set of neutral tasks during the filler task .
Specifically , participants 1210 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 viewed two abstract drawings composed of blue shapes , and were asked to note two similarities and two differences between the drawings .
In the risky decision , participants imagined that they cur- rently work at a job that pays them a small amount and is very secure .
Participants then read that they could instead work as a freelance consultant in the same field , in which case they would have the potential to be paid a lot more money .
They further read that they had a lot of money in savings as a financial cushion and that they could most likely get their current job back if taking the new job did not work out , but that taking the new job was nevertheless somewhat risky because it did not offer job security .
Participants faced a binary choice between staying at their current secure job or taking the risk of switching jobs to be a consultant .
Participants entered their decision by select- ing a radio button labeled either “ I would stay at my cur- rent job ” or “ I would take the risk of leaving my current job to work as a consultant. ” After participants entered their decision , we assessed the subjective novelty of the risk context with a two-item in- dex .
Specifically , participants responded to the following two questions : The last time that you saw the job decision information , how new did the information look to you ?
The last time that you saw the job decision information , how familiar did the information look to you ?
( reverse- coded ) .
Of note , “ the last time ” that uninterrupted partici- pants saw the information was their initial exposure to it , but for interrupted participants it was their second exposure to it .
Participants entered their responses on separate sev- en-point scales ( 1 : Not at all ; 7 : Very much ) .
A factor anal- ysis of these items yielded only one factor with an eigenvalue greater than 1 , so responses were averaged into a single composite index of subjective novelty ( r ¼ .65 , p < .001 ) .
We next assessed participants ’ apprehension via the same measure employed in study 1C .
Results and Discussion Conceptually replicating the previous studies , inter- rupted participants more often chose to take the risk ( 79.4 % ) than did uninterrupted participants ( 63.7 % ; v2 ( df ¼ 1 , N¼ 204 ) ¼ 6.17 , p ¼ .013 ; Cohen ’ s d ¼ .35 ) .
Further consistent with our theorizing , interrupted participants per- ceived the risk information to be less novel ( M ¼ 2.47 , SE ¼ .14 ) than did uninterrupted participants ( M ¼ 4.04 , SE ¼ .17 ) , t ( 202 ) ¼ 7.32 , p < .001 ( Cohen ’ s d ¼ 1.03 ) .
Also as predicted , interrupted participants reported less apprehen- sion ( M ¼ 3.79 , SE ¼ .16 ) than did uninterrupted partici- pants ( M ¼ 4.27 , SE ¼ .16 ) , t ( 202 ) ¼ 2.13 , p ¼ .035 ( Cohen ’ s d ¼ .30 ) .
Furthermore , and also consistent with our theorizing , a serial mediation model with bootstrapping ( Hayes 2013 ) revealed that the interruption increased risk taking because it decreased subjective novelty , which in turn reduced apprehension , which increased risk taking ( 95 % CI : .2343 , .6330 ; see figure 2 ) .
STUDY 2 Study 1D provided mediation evidence suggesting that an interruption can increase financial risk taking by de- creasing the subjective novelty of the interrupted risk infor- mation .
Importantly , this mechanism predicts that if a risk continues to appear novel after an interruption , then the in- terruption will no longer increase risk taking .
In other words , our theorizing predicts that the subjective constancy of the risk context before and after the interruption is nec- essary for an interruption to increase risk taking .
In study 2 we tested this theorizing by directly manipulating stimuli novelty post-interruption .
We did so by changing the risk ’ s presentation ( background color and font ) post-interruption .
We theorized that these presentational changes would cause the risk to appear subjectively novel post- interruption , and thus that the interruption effect would attenuate .
To ensure that any effect of the post-interruption format change was not caused by the specific formats , we counter- balanced the initial and subsequent formats .
Thus , study 2 had a 3 ( interruption condition : no interruption vs. interruption vs. interruption-with-format-change ) 2 ( starting format : format 1 vs. format 2 ) design .
Format 1 and format 2 can be collapsed if there are no differences between them .
Method Four hundred four participants ( mean age ¼ 30.9 years , 204 males ) on Amazon Mechanical Turk participated in an online experiment in exchange for monetary payment .
In the risky decision task , participants were given $ 1.50 as bonus pay for the study , but could wager any amount of it toward an investment that had a 10 % chance of success , FIGURE 1 MEDIATION OF CONDITION ON RISK TAKING IN STUDY 1C Condition Risk Taking ( .10^ ) .19** -.62* -.14*** Apprehension NOTES.—The path coefficients are unstandardized betas .
The value in paren- theses indicates the effect of condition on risk taking after controlling for the mediator .
*p < .05 **p < .01 ***p < .001 ˆ p < .100 .
KUPOR , LIU , AND AMIR 1211 D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 and that would yield 10 times the amount invested if it suc- ceeded .
However , an unsuccessful investment would result in the loss of the amount wagered .
The interruption was inserted via the procedure de- scribed in the previous studies .
However , we altered the content of the interruption task to increase its realism .
Specifically , participants were asked to imagine that they had received text messages from a friend ( “ Hey how ’ s it going ? ” and “ I ’ m thinking of buying a tea kettle right now - should I get one that ’ s blue or red ? ” ) , and type how they would respond to these text messages in an empty field .
In the interruption-with-format-change condition , the risky decision was presented in a different format after the interruption .
Format 1 presented the risky decision in Arial font and a white background , while Format 2 presented the same information in Courier New font and a teal back- ground .
Importantly , the content of the risk information was identical before and after the interruption in all of the interruption conditions .
Results and Discussion As predicted , a 3 ( interruption condition : no interruption vs. interruption vs. interruption-with-format-change ) 2 ( starting format : format 1 vs. format 2 ) ANOVA on amount invested revealed neither a significant main effect of format ( F ( 1 , 398 ) ¼ .08 , p ¼ .780 ) nor a significant interaction between format and interruption conditions , F ( 2 , 398 ) ¼ .13 , p ¼ .880 .
Therefore , we collapsed across format condition .
With format condition collapsed , an ANOVA of inter- ruption condition on risk taking revealed a main effect , F ( 2 , 401 ) ¼ 3.39 , p ¼ .035 ( figure 3 ) .
Planned comparisons showed that participants in the interruption condition invested more ( real ) money in the risky option ( M¼ .59 , SE ¼ .04 ) than participants in the no interruption condition ( M¼ .46 , SE ¼ .04 ; Fisher ’ s LSD : p ¼ .017 ) , replicating the results in the previous studies .
However , as hypothe- sized , this interruption effect was not significant for participants in the interruption-with-format-change condi- tion ( M¼ .48 , SE ¼ .03 ) , who invested the same amount as those in the no interruption condition , Fisher ’ s LSD : p ¼ .750 .
Also as expected , participants in the interruption con- dition invested more than participants in the interruption- with-format-change condition ( Fisher ’ s LSD : p ¼ .036 ) .
Thus , changing the risk ’ s appearance such that it appeared novel again when individuals returned to it after the inter- ruption eliminated the interruption effect , which provides further evidence that reduced stimuli novelty underlies an interruption ’ s influence on financial risk taking .
STUDY 3A The previous studies provide converging evidence that an interruption increases financial risk taking because the repeat exposure inherent in an interruption can reduce the subjective novelty of the risk information , and thus reduce apprehension .
Study 3A examines two alternative explana- tions .
First , perhaps an interruption introduces cognitive load , and the resulting degraded processing underlies the cur- rent results .
Because previous research suggests that a single interruption is unlikely to produce cognitive load ( Griffin and Ricchiute 2011 ) , we suspect that this possibility is un- likely .
Further , previous research suggests that cognitive load does not increase risk taking ( Franco-Watkins et al .
2006 ; Whitney et al .
2008 ) .
Nevertheless , in this study , we empiri- cally contrast an interruption with cognitive load—we FIGURE 3 RISK TAKING IN STUDY 2 NOTES.—Error bars are standard errors .
FIGURE 2 MEDIATION OF CONDITION ON RISK TAKING IN STUDY 1D NOTES.—The path coefficients are unstandardized betas .
The value in paren- theses indicates the effect of condition on risk taking after controlling for the mediators .
*p < .05 **p < .01 ***p < .001 ˆp < .100 .
1212 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 predict that an interruption increases risk taking , but we have no reason to expect that cognitive load increases risk taking .
Second , perhaps an interruption increases risk taking by generating time pressure , which ( like cognitive load ) simi- larly degrades processing ( i.e. , reduces systematic process- ing ; Sonbonmatsu and Fazio 1990 ; Suri and Monroe 2003 ) .
We suspect that this possibility is also unlikely because prior research reveals that moderate time pressure does not impact risk taking , and that extreme time pressure decreases risk taking ( because extreme time pressure heightens stress , which increases consumers ’ desire to alle- viate this stress by taking less risk ; Zur and Breznitz 1981 ) .
Nevertheless , in study 3A we tested this possibility by di- rectly comparing the effect of an interruption to the effect of time pressure ; we predicted that an interruption would increase risk taking and that time pressure would not .
Study 3A also compared expected versus unexpected interruptions .
Our theorizing suggests that it is the repeated exposure inherent in an interruption—regardless of whether that repeated exposure is expected or unexpected—that underlies the current results .
Therefore , we predicted that an interruption has the same effect on financial risk taking regardless of whether it is unexpected or not .
Method Seven hundred forty-one participants ( mean age ¼ 36.4 years , 349 males ) on Amazon Mechanical Turk partic- ipated in an online experiment in exchange for monetary payment .
All participants were asked to imagine that they were choosing between two options : option A offered a 100 % chance of $ 5 , while option B offered a 50 % chance of $ 12 and a 50 % chance of $ 0 .
Participants were ran- domly assigned to one of five conditions : no interruption , unexpected interruption , expected interruption , cognitive load , or time pressure .
Participants randomly assigned to the expected interruption condition and unexpected interruption condition were asked to switch to a filler task during the financial decision ( thus their decision was interrupted ) .
The unexpected interruption condition was implemented as in the previous studies .
In con- trast , participants in the expected interruption condition read at the beginning of the survey that they would view informa- tion about a risky decision on the next page , but that before they made their decision , they would be asked to complete an unrelated task ; after completing that unrelated task , they would again see the risky decision information , at which point they could make their decision .
Thus , participants in the expected interruption condition expected that their forthcom- ing decision would be interrupted .
In contrast , participants in the cognitive load condition completed a validated cognitive load manipulation while making their risk decision .
Significant literature reveals that tasks requiring participants to count the total number of instances of an ongoing event ( the number of times that participants blink , the number of flashing boxes that appear on a screen , the number of times that a particular word appears in text , etc . )
can reduce working memory and thus induce cognitive load ( Fitzsimons and Williams 2000 ; Kupor and Tormala 2015 ; Monahan and Laliker 2002 ; Raghubir and Krishna 1999 ; €Ulkümen , Thomas , and Morwitz 2008 ) .
We administered one form of this fre- quently used load manipulation ( Kupor and Tormala 2015 ; Khan and Kupor 2017 ) among participants in the cognitive load condition : specifically , while participants viewed the risk information , they counted the number of times that blue and red boxes flashed on their screen .
Finally , participants in the time pressure condition read instructions that they should read the risk information and make a choice within 7 seconds .
To increase the salience of this time pressure , a stopwatch appeared at the top-left cor- ner of the screen and counted down from 7 to 0 seconds .
As previously noted , participants in the interruption con- ditions were interrupted with a filler task .
In contrast , par- ticipants assigned to the cognitive load , time pressure , and no interruption conditions completed this same filler task prior to starting the financial decision ; thus , all participants completed the same filler task , thereby controlling for any filler task effects .
The filler task was composed of two neu- tral subtasks .
In the first , participants listed two similarities and two differences between two presented drawings ( as in study 1D ) .
Next , participants unscrambled 11 neutral words ( e.g. , hair , see , and walk ) .
Results and Discussion An omnibus chi-square revealed that condition signifi- cantly influenced risk decisions , v2 ( df ¼ 4 , N¼ 741 ) ¼ 12.66 , p ¼ .013 ( figure 4 ) .
As expected , post-hocs revealed that participants in both the expected interruption condition ( 26.7 % ; v2 ¼ 6.11 , p ¼ .013 ) and the unexpected interruption condition ( 28.8 % ; v2 ¼ 8.21 , p ¼ .004 ) took greater risk than participants in the no interruption condi- tion ( 15.4 % ) , but as predicted , participants in the expected interruption and unexpected interruption conditions took equivalent risk , v2 ¼ .19 , p ¼ .663 .
In contrast , neither time pressure ( 18.3 % ; v2 ¼ .47 , p ¼ .493 ) nor cognitive load ( 18.0 % ; v2 ¼ .33 , p ¼ .568 ) increased risk taking compared to participants in the no interruption condition ; moreover , participants in the former conditions took equiv- alent risk ( v2 ¼ .00 , p ¼ .953 ) .
Further , participants in the unexpected interruption condition took greater risk than did participants in the time pressure condition ( v2 ¼ 4.76 , p ¼ .029 ) and the cognitive load condition ( v2 ¼ 4.13 , p ¼ .042 ) , and participants in the expected interruption condi- tion took marginally greater risk than those in the time pressure condition ( v2 ¼ 3.17 , p ¼ .075 ) and the cognitive load condition ( v2 ¼ 2.79 , p ¼ .095 ) .
Finally , an analysis comparing the interruption conditions ( collapsing the expected interruption and unexpected interruption KUPOR , LIU , AND AMIR 1213 D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 conditions , which did not significantly differ ; v2 ¼ .19 , p ¼ .663 ) , the degraded processing conditions ( collapsing the time pressure and cognitive load conditions , which did not significantly differ ; v2 ¼ .00 , p ¼ .953 ) , and the no interruption condition revealed that the interruption in- creased risk taking relative to both the processing degrada- tion conditions ( v2 ¼ 7.36 , p ¼ .007 ) and the control condition ( v2 ¼ 8.85 , p ¼ .003 ) , the latter of which did not differ ( v2 ¼ .54 , p ¼ .462 ) .
In sum , as expected , study 3A revealed that participants in the unexpected interruption condition took significantly greater risk than did participants in both the degraded proc- essing conditions .
However , it is important to note that— although participants in the expected interruption condition took greater risk than did participants in the no interruption condition , and the same amount of risk as participants in the unexpected interruption condition—the difference in risk taking between participants in the expected interruption condition and the degraded processing condi- tions was unexpectedly marginal .
Therefore , we encourage future research to explore the dynamics underlying expected interruptions , and how they may be similar to , or different from , other interventions during decision making .
STUDY 3B Study 3B tests another alternative mechanism : perhaps an interruption leads participants to deliberate about their decision for a longer duration , and perhaps extended delib- eration increases risk taking .
We test this possibility by comparing an interruption to elongated thinking .
To the best of our knowledge , previous research has yet to examine whether elongated thinking alters risk taking .
Thus , in study 3B we empirically contrast an interruption with elongated thinking .
Method Seven hundred one participants ( mean age ¼ 36.7 years , 357 males ) on Amazon Mechanical Turk participated in an online experiment in exchange for monetary payment .
In the risky decision , participants imagined that they were de- ciding how much of $ 150 they wished to invest in a risky option .
They read that the risky option had a 10 % chance of success , and that if it succeeded they would receive 20 times their investment .
If it failed , they would lose the amount they invested .
Participants entered the amount that they would invest into an empty response box .
Participants were randomly assigned to one of four con- ditions : a no interruption condition , an interruption condition , or a 60- ( or 110- ) second extended deliberation condition .
The interruption was inserted via the procedure described in the unexpected interruption condition in study 2 .
In the 60- ( vs. 110- ) second extended deliberation condi- tion , participants were instructed to look at and think about the decision information for 60 ( vs. 110 ) seconds before making their decision , and were able to enter their decision after 60 ( vs. 110 ) seconds had elapsed .
We selected these two durations after conducting a pretest revealing that inter- rupted participants viewed the decision information for an average of 60.62 seconds in total .
Thus , we selected the 60- second interval to match the total duration that interrupted participants viewed the decision information page .
The same pretest revealed that interrupted participants viewed the filler task page for an average of 49.22 seconds ( SD¼ 38.27 seconds ) ; thus , we selected the 110-second in- terval to match the duration that interrupted participants de- voted to both the filler and decision task , thereby equating the amount of time that elapsed between the initial exposure and final decision in the interruption condition and the extended deliberation ( 110-second ) condition .
Results and Discussion An ANOVA of condition on risk taking revealed a sig- nificant effect , F ( 3 , 697 ) ¼ 3.41 , p ¼ .017 .
As before , par- ticipants in the interruption condition took greater risk ( M ¼ 49.56 , SD¼ 43.88 ) than participants in the no interruption condition ( M ¼ 37.65 , SD¼ 36.24 ; Fisher ’ s LSD : p ¼ .004 ) .
Moreover , they also took more risk than participants in the 60-second extended duration condition ( M ¼ 38.95 , SD¼ 44.82 ; Fisher ’ s LSD : p ¼ .011 ) and par- ticipants in the 110-second extended duration condition ( M ¼ 39.42 , SD¼ 39.07 ; Fisher ’ s LSD : p ¼ .046 ) .
Participants in these latter three conditions took equivalent financial risk ( Fisher ’ s LSDs : ps > .726 ) .
FIGURE 4 RISK TAKING IN STUDY 3A NOTES.—Error bars are standard errors .
1214 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 In sum , study 3B provides initial evidence that an inter- ruption ’ s impact on risk taking is unlikely to be due to the mere passage of time .
When approximate duration was equated , an interrupted exposure to a risk context produced different risk decisions than did a continuous exposure to that same context .
In fact , we observed no difference be- tween risk taking in the no interruption condition and the extended duration conditions .
However , it is important to note that study 3B equated duration by exposing partici- pants in the extended duration conditions to the decision in- formation for the duration that interrupted participants viewed the decision information and the filler task in a pretest .
Despite the fact that interrupted participants in the pretest and the main study viewed the identical decision in- formation and filler task , it is nevertheless possible that the time they expended on these tasks differed .
Thus , although study 3B provides initial evidence consistent with the possi- bility that an interruption ’ s impact on risk taking is unlikely to be due to the mere passage of time , future research could profit from further investigating this possibility .
It is also important to note that study 3B ’ s examination was limited to contexts in which the continuous exposure duration totaled less than 2 minutes .
Our theorizing does not preclude the possibility that continued exposure extending longer durations could reduce the impact of novelty-induced apprehension on consumers ’ final deci- sions .
For example , if a decision maker deliberated contin- uously about study 3B ’ s decision for several hours , it is possible that this extended duration could reduce the im- pact of the original novelty-induced apprehension on the consumer ’ s ultimate decision .
Importantly , however , re- duced apprehension is not the only possible consequence of extended exposure and elaboration ; research reveals that such extended elaboration can distort decision making by altering the weighting of decision attributes , which in turn can generate suboptimal decisions ( Payne et al .
2008 ; Thorsteinson and Withrow 2009 ) .
Whether these conse- quences of extended deliberation ( i.e. , this distorted attrib- ute weighting in combination with potentially reduced apprehension ) increase risk taking is unclear ; investigating this possibility is a useful direction for future study .
Most relevant to the current research , study 3B finds that— within the frequent instances in which consumers make decisions over shorter durations—an interruption can in- crease risk taking .
GENERAL DISCUSSION Across seven studies , with two involving real monetary consequences , the current research finds that an interruption can increase risk taking across a wide range of financial risk contexts .
We empirically document the causal role of reduced subjective novelty in driving this ef- fect through both mediation ( study 1D ) and moderation ( study 2 ) .
Across studies , we find that an interruption ’ s af- fective consequences impact risk taking across many types of financial risk contexts , including contexts that a purely cognitive framework predicts would be unimpacted by an interruption .
Uncovering interruptions ’ affective conse- quences thus provides crucial insight into the architecture of interrupted decision making .
This research also builds on the mere exposure literature .
As previously noted , significant literature documents that repeated exposure to neutral and positive stimuli increases positive responses to them ( Bühler and Hetzer 1928 ; Zajonc 1968 ) .
Of note , however , research has also revealed that repeated exposure to negative stimuli can increase the unpleasantness of the negative stimuli ( Brickman et al .
1972 ; Kruglanski , Freund , and Bar-Tal 1996 ; Perlman and Oskamp 1971 ; Witvliet and Vrana 2007 ) .
Because the prospect of a loss is negative , this literature could suggest that an interruption during a gain-loss risk ( and the result- ing repeated exposure to the prospect of a loss ) would in- tensify the perceived unpleasantness of a loss , and increase a decision maker ’ s desire to avoid a loss as a result ( thereby reducing risk taking in a gain-loss risk context ) .
However , the current studies examining gain-loss risks re- veal the opposite effect .
If repeated exposure increases the perceived unpleasantness of negative stimuli , why do we not find that an interruption decreases risk taking in gain- loss risk contexts ?
One possibility arises from the fact that gain-loss risk stimuli inherently contain both a positive component ( e.g. , a potential upside ) and a negative compo- nent ( e.g. , a potential downside ) .
Consequently , a repeated exposure may both intensify negative responses to the risk ’ s downside as well as intensify positive responses to the risk ’ s upside ( because mere exposure increases liking of positive stimuli ; Kruglanski et al .
1996 ; Witvliet and Vrana 2007 ) .
As a result , the overall effect of repeated ex- posure on reactions to the risk content may be neutral .
On top of that , however , mere exposure reduces sensory nov- elty and thus reduces apprehension ( regardless of stimulus content ; Bühler and Hetzer 1928 ) , and the current results suggest that it is this sensory novelty reduction that drives the interruption effect .
In this way , our research provides novel insight into the effects of repeated exposure in a de- cision context containing both negative components and positive components , and in which consumers often rely on their feelings when forming their decisions .
In the current research , we found that an interruption can increase risk taking in a wide range of risk contexts .
We encourage future research to investigate whether this inter- ruption effect also occurs for risks with loss-loss tradeoffs ( i.e. , tradeoffs between two loss options ) .
In contrast to an interruption during a gain-loss risk decision , an interrup- tion during a loss-loss risk decision ( and the resulting re- peated exposure to the exclusive prospect of losses ) may intensify negative responses to the risk ’ s downsides with- out the countervailing intensification of positive responses KUPOR , LIU , AND AMIR 1215 D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 that occurs in gain-loss risks ( in response to the repeated exposure to a potential gain ) .
Thus , whether an interruption during a loss-loss risk increases risk taking may hinge on the magnitude of these negative responses ; when these responses are much larger than the mere-exposure-induced decrease in apprehension ( which occurs regardless of stim- ulus content ; Bühler and Hetzer 1928 ) , content-based nega- tive responses may trump any change in novelty-induced apprehension , and an interruption may no longer increase risk taking .
We encourage future research to investigate this possibility .
Another caveat of the current research is that the gain- gain risk examined in the current research ( in study 1C ) contained outcomes that were all positive except for one , which was zero dollars—thus , not all potential outcomes in this study were strictly positive .
The theorizing outlined above suggests that an interruption will similarly increase risk taking when all possible outcomes are strictly positive , and we encourage future research to directly test this prediction .
Also important , the magnitude of apprehension evoked by consumers ’ first exposure to a risk context ( i.e. , before an interruption occurs ) may also moderate an interruption ’ s influence on risk taking .
For example , interruption-induced decreases in apprehension may be insufficient to impact decisions that evoke substantial apprehension ( e.g. , deci- sions between medical treatments for a potentially terminal disease ) .
On the other extreme , when the content of the risk information engenders little or negligible amounts of apprehension ( as may be the case when a risk ’ s stakes are extremely small ) , an interruption may also not impact risk taking .
This is because when there is very little apprehen- sion evoked by a risk ’ s content , there may be little room for an interruption to reduce the total amount of apprehen- sion .
Thus , it is possible that the impact of an interruption on risk taking is curvilinear—an interruption may have the greatest effect on risk taking when the apprehension evoked by the risky situation is moderate , rather than very low or very high .
As an initial test of this possibility , we conducted an exploratory study in which we examined the impact of interruptions on risks that elicited varying levels of apprehension .
In particular , we manipulated apprehen- sion by varying the size of the financial stakes in the risky decision , which is a common dimension along which risks in the real world vary—to that end , 1,453 Mechanical Turk participants were either interrupted or not while choosing between a sure $ 0.12 ( vs. $ 0.50 , $ 2 , $ 8 , $ 32 , $ 128 , or $ 512 ) gift certificate to their preferred coffee shop , versus a 75 % chance of $ 0 and a 25 % chance of a $ 0.50 ( vs. $ 2 , $ 8 , $ 32 , $ 128 , $ 512 , or $ 2,048 , respectively ) gift certifi- cate to their preferred coffee shop .
Consistent with our the- orizing , a curvilinear effect emerged , b ( 1447 ) ¼ –16.37 , z ¼ –2.70 , p ¼ .007 .
However , we hesitate to draw definitive conclusions from this single exploratory study ; thus , we encourage future research to further examine how the magnitude of the interruption effect changes—and whether it changes in a curvilinear fashion—with the size of the stakes of a risky decision .
FUTURE DIRECTIONS : THE POTENTIAL MODERATING ROLE OF RISK TYPE AND INTERRUPTION TYPE Our theoretical framework suggests that several other features of the risk context and interruption type may also moderate an interruption ’ s influence on risk taking .
First , in the current research , we examined decisions that involve the processing of novel financial risk information .
Our results indicate that novel risks become less subjectively novel after an interruption , which leads to less apprehen- sion and greater risk taking .
An interesting question is whether this effect extends to other novel risk contexts be- yond financial risks ( e.g. , health risks , social risks , or recre- ational risks ; Weber , Blais , and Betz 2002 ) .
We posit that when risky situations involve distinct external stimuli ( e.g. , external visual or auditory content ) , the subjective novelty reduction mechanism documented in the current research may similarly unfold .
However , some risk contexts involve mentally represented risk information ( e.g. , a mentally rep- resented fear of cancer ) ; it is unclear whether resuming de- liberation of mentally represented information after an interruption similarly reduces that information ’ s subjective novelty .
Also important , the novelty reduction mechanism sug- gests that the current effect may attenuate in risky deci- sions that are routine or already highly familiar to the decision maker , because interruptions may be unlikely to further reduce such already low levels of novelty .
For ex- ample , for decision makers who face the same kind of deci- sions frequently ( e.g. , professional gamblers , stock traders ) , it is unclear how much novelty is present at the beginning of such routine decisions , and hence whether an interruption can produce further reductions in subjective novelty .
We encourage future research to investigate whether an interruption may impact risk taking in such contexts .
In a similar vein , individual differences that reduce the impact of subjective novelty on risk decisions may moder- ate the current results—for example , shifts in novelty may be less likely to impact individuals whose risk decisions are driven primarily by impulsivity rather than the appre- hension generated from specific risk contexts ( e.g. , Eysenck and Eysenck 1977 ; Zuckerman 1983 ) .
Also relevant to future research , our theorizing predicts that an interruption may similarly increase risk taking if it is initiated by the consumer rather than an external source—regardless of its genesis , we predict that it is the repeated exposure inherent in an interruption that underlies its effect .
However , this possibility warrants investigation 1216 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 because the consequences of internally generated interrup- tions may be moderated by several endogenous factors ( e.g. , why and when individuals interrupt their decisions ) .
We also encourage future research to investigate whether an interruption needs to prompt a complete and continued cognitive break from the decision task in order to increase risk taking .
Of note , the current results do not provide insight into whether interrupted participants expe- rienced a complete cognitive break during the interruption , or whether they deliberated about their decision during the interruption .
Most relevant to the current theorizing , how- ever , we find initial evidence consistent with the possibility that elongated deliberation does not underlie an interrup- tion ’ s impact on risk taking ( study 3B ) .
We theorize that this is because an interruption increases risk taking by in- troducing an instance of visual re-exposure—when con- sumers see decision information for a second time , they experience an ease of recognition that evokes less appre- hension .
Consistent with this possibility ( and as previously noted ) , the current research provides initial evidence that extended elaboration alone is insufficient to increase risk taking .
Thus , one possibility is that an interruption does not need to prompt a complete cognitive break from the deci- sion task to increase risk taking .
We encourage future re- search to investigate this possibility .
Finally , the current research may also have implications beyond risk contexts .
We find that an interruption can alter decision making by diminishing apprehension , and this process may similarly alter decision making when appre- hension drives decision making in riskless contexts .
For example , consider a consumer deciding when to schedule an apprehension-inducing dentist appointment .
If this ap- prehension would otherwise lead the consumer to schedule the dentist appointment for a date in the distant future , an interruption during this decision may ease the consumer ’ s apprehension and increase this consumer ’ s willingness to schedule the appointment sooner .
Future research could profit from investigating the potential implications of the current findings in such apprehension-evoking riskless de- cision contexts .
MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS In addition to providing theoretical insight , this research has significant practical implications .
For example , mar- keters may strategically introduce short interruptions ( pop- up ads , wait times , etc . )
into the consumer environment to influence customers ’ risk decisions .
More specifically , on- line retailers may present choice options that consumers perceive to be risky ( e.g. , products that consumers perceive to be disfluent and/or unfamiliar ; Campbell and Goldstein 2001 ; Song and Schwarz 2009 ) on a first web page , and then require consumers to enter their choice on a subse- quent web page that displays the same options and requires a few moments to load ( and thus introduces a moment of re-exposure ) .
Of course , it is possible that such strategies could carry a cost—for example , consumers may nega- tively evaluate retailers that are susceptible to such inter- ruptions and delays .
However , some types of interruptions may be less likely to trigger this negative backlash—for example , a brief spinning disk that is labeled as a helpful momentary search for updates may be more likely to gar- ner appreciation rather than frustration ; moreover , a conse- quent message that there are no updates may further amplify the current results by heightening subjective famil- iarity .
Retailers that profit from consumer risk taking may need to market-test various types of interruptions in order to optimize consumer responses .
In sum , the current research provides novel insight into how and when an interruption increases financial risk tak- ing .
We encourage future research to further investigate the boundaries and implications of interruptions ’ impact on risk taking .
DATA COLLECTION INFORMATION All of the authors ran the studies on Mechanical Turk in 2015–2017 .
The authors jointly reviewed and analyzed the data .
REFERENCES Armony , Jorge L. , David Servan-Schreiber , Jonathan D. Cohen , and Joseph E. LeDoux ( 1997 ) , “ Computational modeling of emotion : Explorations through the anatomy and physiology of fear conditioning , ” Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 1 ( 1 ) , 28–34 .
Avnet , Tamar , Michel Tuan Pham , and Andrew T. Stephen ( 2012 ) , “ Consumers ’ Trust in Feelings as Information , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 39 ( 4 ) , 720–35 .
Berlyne , Daniel E. , Margaret A. Craw , P. H. Salapatek , and Judith L. Lewis ( 1963 ) , “ Novelty , Complexity , Incongruity , Extrinsic Motivation , and GSR , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology , 66 ( December ) , 60–7 .
Bernanke , Ben S. ( 1983 ) , “ Irreversibility , Uncertainty , and Cyclical Investment , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 98 ( 1 ) , 85–106 .
Bettman , James R. ( 1979 ) , “ Memory factors in consumer choice : A review. ” The Journal of Marketing , 43 ( 2 ) , 37–53 .
Bodenhausen , Galen V. ( 1990 ) , “ Stereotypes as Judgmental Heuristics : Evidence of Circadian Variations in Discrimination , ” Psychological Science , 1 ( 5 ) , 319–22 .
Brickman , Philip , Joel Redfield , Albert A. Harrison , and Rick Crandall ( 1972 ) , “ Drive and Predisposition as Factors in the Attitudinal Effects of Mere Exposure , ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 8 ( 1 ) , 31–44 .
Bühler , Charlotte and Hildegard Hetzer ( 1928 ) , “ The First Comprehension of Expression in the First Year of Life , ” Zeitschrift für Psychologie , 107 , 30–49 .
Campbell , Margaret C. and Ronald C. Goodstein ( 2001 ) , “ The Moderating Effect of Perceived Risk on Consumers ’ KUPOR , LIU , AND AMIR 1217 D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 Evaluations of Product Incongruity : Preference for the Norm , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 28 ( 3 ) , 439–49 .
Carrillo-Diaz , Maria , Antonio Crego , Jason M. Armfield , and Martin Romero-Maroto ( 2012 ) , “ Treatment Experience , Frequency of Dental Visits , and Children ’ s Dental Fear : A Cognitive Approach , ” European Journal of Oral Sciences , 120 ( 1 ) , 75–81 .
Carver , Charles S. , and Teri L. White ( 1994 ) , “ Behavioral Inhibition , Behavioral Activation , and Affective Responses to Impending Reward and Punishment : The BIS/BAS Scales , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 67 ( 2 ) , 319–33 .
Charness , Gary , Uri Gneezy , and Alex Imas ( 2013 ) , “ Experimental Methods : Eliciting Risk Preferences , ” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organizations , 87 ( March ) , 43–51 .
Eysenck , Sybil B. G. and Hans J. Eysenck ( 1977 ) , “ The Place of Impulsiveness in a Dimensional System of Personality Description , ” British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology , 16 ( 1 ) , 57–68 .
Finucane , Melissa L. , Ali Alhakami , Paul Slovic , and Stephen M. Johnson ( 2000 ) , “ The Affect Heuristic in Judgments of Risks and Benefits , ” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making , 13 ( 1 ) , 1–17 .
Finucane , Melissa L. and Joan L. Holup ( 2006 ) , “ Risk as Value : Combining Affect and Analysis in Risk Judgments , ” Journal of Risk Research , 9 ( 2 ) , 141–64 .
Fitzsimons , Gavan J. and Patti Williams ( 2000 ) , “ Asking Questions Can Change Choice Behavior : Does It Do So Automatically or Effortfully ? ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Applied , 6 ( 3 ) , 195–206 .
Franco-Watkins , Ana M. , Harold Pashler , and Timothy C. Rickard ( 2006 ) , “ Does Working Memory Load Lead to Greater Impulsivity ?
Commentary on Hinson , Jameson , and Whitney ( 2003 ) , ” 32 ( 2 ) , 443–47 .
Gneezy , Uri and Jan Potters ( 1997 ) , “ An Experiment on Risk Taking and Evaluation Periods , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 112 ( 2 ) , 631–45 .
Goschke , Thomas and Julius Kuhl ( 1993 ) , “ Representation of Intentions : Persisting Activation in Memory , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 19 ( 5 ) , 1211–26 .
Griffin , Jeremy B. and David Ricchiute ( 2011 ) , “ Concurrent Processing of Accounting Issues and Auditors ’ Evidence- Evaluation Decisions , ” working paper , University of Notre Dame , Notre Dame , IN 46556 .
Guiso , Luigi , Paola Sapienza , and Luigi Zingales ( 2013 ) , “ Time Varying Risk Aversion , ” National Bureau of Economic Research , NBER Working Paper No .
19284 .
Hayes , Andrew F. ( 2013 ) , Introduction to Mediation , Moderation , and Conditional Process Analysis , New York : Guilford .
Hsu , Ming , Meghana Bhatt , Ralph Adolphs , Daniel Tranel , and Colin F. Camerer ( 2005 ) , “ Neural Systems Responding to Degrees of Uncertainty in Human Decision- Making , ” Science , 310 ( 5754 ) , 1680–83 .
Jackson , Thomas , Ray Dawson , and Darren Wilson ( 2001 ) , “ The Cost of Email Interruption , ” Journal of Systems and Information Technology , 5 ( 1 ) , 81–92 .
Jacoby , Lawrence , Colleen Kelley , and Jane Dywan ( 1989 ) , “ Memory Attributions , ” in Varieties of Memory and Consciousness , ed .
Henry L. Roediger III and Fergus I. M. Craik , Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum , 391–422 .
Johnson , Branden B. and Paul Slovic ( 1995 ) , “ Presenting Uncertainty in Health Risk Assessment : Initial Studies of Its Effects on Risk Perception and Trust , ” Risk Analysis , 15 ( 4 ) , 485–94 .
Khan , Uzma and Daniella M. Kupor ( 2017 ) , “ Risk ( Mis ) Perception : When Greater Risk Reduces Risk Valuation , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 43 ( 5 ) , 769–86 .
Kruglanski , Arie W. , Tali Freund , and Daniel Bar-Tal ( 1996 ) , “ Motivational Effects in the Mere-Exposure Paradigm , ” European Journal of Social Psychology , 26 ( 3 ) , 479–99 .
Kupor , Daniella and Zakary Tormala ( 2015 ) , “ Persuasion , Interrupted : The Effect of Momentary Interruptions on Message Processing and Persuasion , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 42 ( 2 ) , 300–15 .
Kupor , Daniella , Taly Reich , and Baba Shiv ( 2015 ) , “ Can ’ t Finish What You Started ?
The Effect of Climactic Interruption on Behavior , ” Journal of Consumer Psychology , 25 ( 1 ) , 113–119 .
LeDoux , Joseph E. ( 1996 ) , The Emotional Brain , New York : Simon & Schuster .
Liu , Wendy ( 2008 ) , “ Focusing on Desirability : The Effect of Decision Interruption and Suspension on Preferences , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 35 ( 4 ) , 640–52 .
Loewenstein , George F. , Elke U. Weber , Christopher K. Hsee , and Ned Welch ( 2001 ) , “ Risk as Feelings , ” Psychological Bulletin , 127 ( 2 ) , 267–86 .
Marsh , Richard , Jason L. Hicks , and Martin Bink ( 1998 ) , “ Activation of Completed , Uncompleted , and Partially Completed Intentions , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 24 ( 2 ) , 350–61 .
Maule , John and Ola Svenson ( 1993 ) , Time Pressure and Stress in Human Judgment and Decision Making , New York : Plenum , 323–29 .
Monahan , Jennifer and Melanie Laliker ( 2002 ) , “ Intensifying the Dominant Response II : Nonconscious Negative Affect , Cognitive Demand and Conversations , ” Communication Monographs , 69 ( 4 ) , 357–84 .
Nelson , Leif and Tom Meyvis ( 2008 ) , “ Interrupted Consumption : Adaptation and the Disruption of Hedonic Experience , ” Journal of Marketing Research , 45 ( 6 ) , 654–64 .
Nelson , Leif D. , Tom Meyvis , and Jeff Galak ( 2009 ) , “ Enhancing the Television-Viewing Experience through Commercial Interruptions , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 36 ( 2 ) , 160–72 .
Payne , John W. , James R. Bettman , and Eric J. Johnson ( 1988 ) , “ Adaptive Strategy Selection in Decision Making , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 ( 3 ) , 534–52 .
Perlman , Daniel and Stuart Oskamp ( 1971 ) , “ The Effects of Picture Content and Exposure Frequency on Evaluations of Negroes and Whites , ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 7 ( 5 ) , 503–14 .
Raghubir , Priya and Aradhna Krishna ( 1999 ) , “ Vital Dimensions in Volume Perception : Can the Eye Fool the Stomach ? ” Journal of Marketing Research , 36 ( 3 ) , 313–26 .
Raghunathan , Rajagopal and Michel Tuan Pham ( 1999 ) , “ All Negative Moods Are Not Equal : Motivational Influences of Anxiety and Sadness on Decision Making , ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 79 ( 1 ) , 56–77 .
Roch , Sylvia G. , John Lane , Charles D. Samuelson , Scott T. Allison , and Jennifer L. Dent ( 2000 ) , “ Cognitive Load and the Equality Heuristic : A Two-Stage Model of Resource Overconsumption in Small Groups , ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 83 ( 2 ) , 185–212 .
1218 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019 Rothman , Alexander J. and John A. Updegraff ( 2010 ) , “ Specifying When and How Gain- and Loss-Framed Messages Motivate Healthy Behavior : An Integrated Approach , ” in Perspectives on Framing , ed .
Gideon Keren , London : Psychology Press/Taylor & Francis , 257–78 .
Sayegh , Lisa , William P. Anthony , and Pamela L. Perrewé ( 2004 ) , “ Managerial Decision Making Under Crisis : The Role of Emotion in an Intuitive Decision Process , ” Human Resource Management Review , 14 ( 2 ) , 179–99 .
Savitsky , Kenneth , Victoria Medvec , and Thomas Gilovich ( 1997 ) , “ Remembering and Regretting : The Zeigarnik Effect and the Cognitive Availability of Regrettable Actions and Inactions , ” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 23 ( 3 ) , 248–57 .
Schulreich , Stefan , Holger Gerhardt , and Hauke R. Heekeren ( 2016 ) , “ Incidental Fear Cues Increase Monetary Loss Aversion , ” Emotion , 16 ( 3 ) , 402–12 .
Shiv , Baba and Alexander Fedorikhin ( 2002 ) , “ Spontaneous Versus Controlled Influences of Stimulus-based Affect on Choice Behavior , ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 87 ( 2 ) , 342–70 .
Solomon , Richard L. ( 1980 ) , “ The opponent-process theory of ac- quired motivation : The costs of pleasure and the benefits of pain. ” American Psychologist , 35 ( 8 ) , 691–712 .
Solomon , Richard L. , and John D. Corbit ( 1974 ) , “ An opponent- process theory of motivation : Temporal dynamics of affect , ” Psychological Review , 81 ( 2 ) , 119–145 .
Song , Hyunjin and Norbert Schwarz ( 2009 ) , “ If It ’ s Difficult to Pronounce , It Must Be Risky : Fluency , Familiarity , and Risk Perception , ” Psychological Science , 20 ( 2 ) , 135–8 .
Suri , Rajneesh and Kent B. Monroe ( 2003 ) , “ The Effects of Time Constraints on Consumers ’ Judgments of Prices and Products , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 30 ( 1 ) , 92–104 .
Thaler , Richard H. , Amos Tversky , Daniel Kahneman , and Alan Schwartz ( 1997 ) , “ The Effect of Myopia and Loss Aversion on Risk Taking : An Experimental Test , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 112 ( 2 ) , 647–61 .
Thorsteinson , Todd J. and Scott Withrow ( 2009 ) , “ Does Unconscious Thought Outperform Conscious Thought on Complex Decisions ?
A Further Examination , ” Judgment and Decision Making , 4 ( 3 ) , 235–47 .
Trope , Yaacov , and Nira Liberman ( 2003 ) , “ Temporal Construal , ” Psychological Review , 110 ( 3 ) , 403–21 .
€Ulkümen , Gülden , Manoj Thomas , and Vicki G. Morwitz ( 2008 ) , “ Will I Spend More in 12 Months or a Year ?
The Effect of Ease of Estimation and Confidence on Budget Estimates , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 35 ( 2 ) , 245–56 .
Vlaev , Ivo , Nick Chater , and Neil Stewart ( 2009 ) , “ Dimensionality of Risk Perception : Factors Affecting Consumer Understanding and Evaluation of Financial Risk , ” Journal of Behavioral Finance , 10 ( 3 ) , 158–81 .
Weber , Elke U. , Ann-Renee Blais , and Nancy E. Betz ( 2002 ) , “ A Domain-Specific Risk- Attitude Scale : Measuring Risk Perceptions and Risk Behaviors , ” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making , 15 ( 4 ) , 263–90 .
Whitney , Paul , Christa A. Rinehart , and John M. Hinson ( 2008 ) , “ Framing Effects Under Cognitive Load : The Role of Working Memory in Risky Decisions , ” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 15 ( 6 ) , 1179–84 .
Winkielman , Piotr , Norbert Schwarz , Tetra Fazendeiro , and Rolf Reber ( 2003 ) , “ The Hedonic Marking of Processing Fluency : Implications for Evaluative Judgment , ” Psychology of Evaluation : Affective Processes in Cognition and Emotion , 189–217 .
Witvliet , Charlotte and Scott R. Vrana ( 2007 ) , “ Play It Again Sam : Repeated Exposure to Emotionally Evocative Music Polarises Liking and Smiling Responses , and Influences Other Affective Reports , Facial EMG , and Heart Rate , ” Cognition and Emotion , 21 ( 1 ) , 3–25 .
Wright , William F. and Gordon Bower ( 1992 ) , “ Mood Effects on Subjective Probability Assessment , ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 52 ( 2 ) , 276–91 .
Yeung , Ruth , and Joe Morris ( 2001 ) , “ Food Safety Risk : Consumer Perception and Purchase Behavior , ” British Food Journal , 103 ( 3 ) , 170–87 .
Zajonc , Robert B .
( 1968 ) , “ Attitudinal Effects of Mere Exposure , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology Monographs , 9 ( 2 ) , 1–27 .
Zebrowitz , Leslie A. and Yi Zhang ( 2012 ) , “ Neural Evidence for Reduced Apprehensiveness of Familiarized Stimuli in a Mere Exposure Paradigm , ” Social Neuroscience , 7 ( 4 ) , 347–58 .
Zeigarnik , Bluma ( 1927 ) , “ Das Behalten Erledigter und Unerledigter Handlungen , ” Psychologische Forschung , 9 , 1–85 .
Zijlstra , Fred , Robert A. Roe , Anna B. Leonora , and Irene Krediet ( 1999 ) , “ Temporal Factors in Mental Work : Effects of Interrupted Activities , ” Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology , 72 ( 2 ) , 163–85 .
Zuckerman , Marvin ( 1983 ) , “ Biological Bases of Sensation Seeking , Impulsivity , and Anxiety , ” Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum .
Zur , Hasida Ben , and Shlomo J. Breznitz ( 1981 ) , “ The effect of time pressure on risky choice behavior , ” Acta Psychologica , 47 ( 2 ) , 89–104 .
KUPOR , LIU , AND AMIR 1219 D ow nloaded from https : //academ ic.oup.com /jcr/article-abstract/44/6/1205/4092824 by U niversity of M elbourne Library user on 11 April 2019
