Lee_JournAcaMarkSci_2018_g3wY.pdf
aEFWe5Q.msEAt.rwHbvbDGOXa7nq-Lee_JournAcaMarkSci_2018_g3wY.pdf.plain.html

ORIGINAL EMPIRICAL RESEARCH Hey big spender !
A golden ( color ) atmospheric effect on tipping behavior Na Young Lee1 & Stephanie M. Noble2 & Dipayan Biswas3 Received : 2 November 2015 /Accepted : 3 November 2016 /Published online : 15 November 2016 # Academy of Marketing Science 2016 Abstract This research examines how gold-related color in atmospherics might influence customer tipping behavior at restaurants .
A series of five studies shows that the color gold ( as opposed to other colors ) in a service atmosphere positively influences consumer tipping .
First , a field experiment ( Study 1 ) demonstrates that customers presented with a gold-colored ( vs. black-colored ) service prop ( i.e. , bill folder ) leave larger tips .
Study 2 further confirms this effect of the color gold by validating the findings of Study 1 with a different service prop ( i.e. , tablecloth ) .
Process evidence demonstrates the underly- ing mechanism of this effect , whereby a gold-colored service prop increases tipping by influencing status perceptions about the restaurant and the self ( Study 3 ) .
Additional studies further confirm this by ruling out novelty of the color in this mecha- nism ( Study 4 ) and by highlighting the effect of status on tipping through status priming ( Study 5 ) .
The findings of this research have implications for strategic use of color in servicescape design and atmospherics in general .
Keywords Color .
Gold .
Payment behavior and tipping .
Servicescape .
Service props .
Sensory cues .
Atmospherics .
Retail ambience .
Frontline employee .
Retail strategy Marketers are extensively using colors to create corporate im- ages , build brand personalities , attract consumers , and shape consumer perceptions ( Abril et al .
2009 ; Labrecque andMilne 2012 ; Madden et al .
2000 ) .
Recent industry trends point to an even greater interest in the use of color as a marketing tool to influence consumer behavior .
Apple is incorporating the color gold in their design narratives for strategic purposes to asso- ciate their brand with luxury ( Strange 2015 ) , and GE provides a wide range of color choices to ensure their refrigerators resonate with consumers ( Barry 2015 ) .
Hyatt has used the color gold in their BGold Passport^ loyalty program to convey the notions of exclusive benefits and higher status to cus- tomers who join the program ( Henderson et al .
2011 ) .
Across industries , a wide range of color options are available for mobile phones , laptops , and even home appliances ( Labrecque et al .
2013 ) .
In accordance with these industry trends , academic researchers have recognized the role of color and have provided empirical support for its importance in marketing , including the impact of color on branding ( Labrecque and Milne 2012 ) , purchase intention , choice like- lihood ( Biswas et al .
2014a ) , and shopping behavior ( Babin et al .
2003 ; Bellizzi and Hite 1992 ) .
Despite these agreements on the importance of color as a marketing tool ( Geboy 1996 ) , our understanding of the effects of color remains limited ( Crowley 1993 ; Labrecque andMilne 2012 ) .
Most color-related studies in the relevant marketing literature have investigated color effects by using an arousal- evaluation framework and they provide a limited perspective in terms of understanding the complex nature of the color phenomenon ( Labrecque et al .
2013 ) .
For example , an Kelly Haws served as Area Editor for this article * Stephanie M. Noble snoble4 @ utk.edu Na Young Lee nlee15 @ utk.edu Dipayan Biswas dbiswas @ usf.edu 1 University of Tennessee , 305 Stokely Management Center , Knoxville , TN 37996-0530 , USA 2 University of Tennessee , 310 Stokely Management Center , Knoxville , TN 37996-0530 , USA 3 University of South Florida , BSN 3218 , Department of Marketing , 4202 E. Fowler Avenue , Tampa , FL 33620 , USA J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 DOI 10.1007/s11747-016-0508-3 arousal-evaluation framework posits that consumers respond to color in two ways : arousal or evaluation ( Crowley 1993 ) .
Consumers respond to red ( vs. blue ) by being more active or stimulated ( i.e. , arousal ) , but they respond to blue ( vs. red ) by showing pleasant or relaxed responses ( i.e. , evaluative ) ( Crowley 1993 ) .
This stream of literature has focused on the dichotomized color hue in the investigation of color effects : red/warm vs. blue/cold .
Since color hues are dichotomized based on wavelength , the meaning of color as assessed by consumers ( Madden et al .
2000 ) and colors that are hard to place on the spectrum of red/blue or warm/cold have gained little attention in this stream of literature .
To overcome this , some recent works have examined the effects of color on brand personality by using an embodied-referential meaning framework ( Labrecque and Milne 2012 ; Zeltner 1975 ) .
More attention , however , is needed to understand the ways in which color influences consumers ’ behavior when color has associ- ated meanings , whereby consumers associate words or mean- ing with particular colors ( Labrecque et al .
2013 ) ( e.g. , white might indicate cleanliness to some , such as in white bedding sheets ( Berry et al .
2006 ) ) .
In addition , extant color research has examined the effects of color by focusing on consumer behavior in retailing , branding , or advertising settings ( Babin et al .
2003 ; Bellizzi and Hite 1992 ; Lohse and Rosen 2001 ) .
However , questions about how colors might influence con- sumer tipping behavior , which is a pervasive activity in res- taurant settings , remain unanswered .
Our study extends prior literature by investigating how gold-colored service props influence consumers ’ tipping .
Service props are the objects used in service delivery and help create the overall atmospherics in a service setting ( Fisk et al .
2008 ) .
Tip amount is an important variable behind the viabil- ity of many businesses .
To understand the ways in which gold- colored service props influence consumers , we employ a ref- erential meaning of color framework .
Anecdotal evidence and research studies suggest that the color gold is associated with status perception ( Drèze and Nunes 2009 ) .
Building on the referential meaning of color framework , we posit that con- sumers activate gold–status ( color–meaning ) associations when they encounter the color gold .
Thus , we incorporate consumers ’ assessment of color–meaning in our investigation .
The color gold is widely used in marketing practices ( e.g. , The Hunger Games gold-colored special edition book cov- er ) , but has gained little attention in the marketing literature .
By investigating an understudied but important color , the present research enriches the color marketing literature .
Additionally , the present study contributes to service litera- ture .
Although their importance in the creation of service at- mospherics and service delivery is widely accepted ( Berry et al .
2006 ; Fisk et al .
2008 ) , there is little empirical support in the literature for the strategic use of service props .
Moreover , the results of our study could have significant man- agerial implications for the service industry given the economic importance of tipping ; consumers spend $ 27 billion every year on tipping in US restaurants ( Azar 2007a ) .
A series of five studies shows that gold-colored service props ( vs. other-colored service props ) enhance consumers ’ tip amount through consumers ’ status perceptions .
The first two studies ( Studies 1 and 2 ) demonstrate the positive effects of gold-colored service props on tipping , the last three studies ( Studies 3–5 ) examine the underlying mechanism of the gold effect .
More specifically , in Study 1 , a field experiment con- ducted at a restaurant , we demonstrate that a gold-colored ( vs. black-colored ) service prop ( i.e. , bill folder ) leads to higher tip amounts ( in terms of percentages ) .
In Study 2 , we validate this effect of the color gold in a more controlled lab environment .
Moreover , we use a different service prop in Study 2 ( i.e. , tablecloth ) to enhance the generalizability of the findings .
Delving into the process of the gold effect , we unveil status perception as a mediation mechanism in Study 3 and further confirm this by ruling out a potential explanatory variable related to the novelty of the color in Study 4 .
In Study 5 , we provide further evidence of status as the underlying mecha- nism by examining the effects of priming status .
The remaining sections are organized as follows .
We first review the literature on color , atmospherics , and tipping .
Building on the theoretical framework in the color literature , we link these literature streams to propose our hypotheses .
We then test our hypotheses with the help of five studies .
Finally , we present our conclusions by outlining our contributions and limitations , in addition to providing suggestions for future research .
Theoretical background Color A significant body of research in marketing literature has ex- amined the role of color in the context of two key research questions : ( 1 ) BWhich colors influence consumers ? ^ and ( 2 ) BWhat effects do colors have on consumers and what are the associated implications for businesses ? ^ ( Crowley 1993 ) .
A stream of literature has addressed the first question based on three dimensions of color : hue , chroma , and value ( Gorn et al .
1997 , 2004 ) .
Hue refers to the pigment of a color such as blue , yellow , and green .
Chroma refers to the amount of pig- ment in color , for example , low chroma colors are dull and high chroma colors are rich and deep .
Value is the degree of lightness of a color on a scale ranging from low ( black ) to high ( white ) ( Gorn et al .
1997 ) .
Among the three dimensions of color , hue has been the main focus of color-related studies , especially in the marketing literature .
Although marketers use a wide array of color hues in mar- keting contexts , most researchers have studied dichotomized color hues such as warm versus cool ( or red vs. blue ) and 318 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 examined consumers ’ reactions to them .
Awide range of stud- ies has shown the effects of color on different aspects of con- sumer behavior and the associated marketing implications ( Madden et al .
2000 ) .
For example , consumers ’ purchase in- tentions were higher for merchandise displayed on a blue- colored background ( Babin et al .
2003 ) , and consumers rated a blue-colored shopping environment as more pleasant ( Crowley 1993 ) .
Although these studies provide meaningful insights , color hues other than red and blue also need to be studied given the variety of colors used by marketers .
Our study intends to contribute to the literature by exploring a less-studied color hue , that is , the color gold .
In investigating the second question ( i.e. , BWhat effects do colors have on consumers ?
and what are the associated impli- cations for businesses ? ^ ) , researchers have focused on the effects of color mostly in the contexts of retailing , advertising , and branding ( Bellizzi and Hite 1992 ; Labrecque et al .
2013 ; Lohse and Rosen 2001 ) .
Psychology literature has noted that the effects of color could be context dependent , for example , red clothing motivates approach behavior at a dinner party but the same color motivates avoidance behavior in a street sign ( Elliot and Maier 2014 ) .
In sum , the present research extends the extant color mar- keting literature in two ways .
First , we expand the color hue spectrum in the marketing literature beyond red/blue or warm/ cold to a different color ( gold ) .
Second , we extend the study context of the color effects to tipping in a service setting , which is a novel setting and has been under-explored thus far .
Table 1 presents a summary of the key color studies in greater detail as well as highlights our contribution .
In the next section , we build the theoretical foundation for our hypotheses .
Referential meaning of color Earlier studies in the marketing literature have supported a two-dimensional framework , the arousal-evaluation dimension , in explaining color effects ( Crowley 1993 ; Labrecque and Milne 2012 ) .
Recent studies have turned their attention to embodied and referential mean- ing frameworks ( Labrecque and Milne 2012 ; Labrecque et al .
2013 ) , focusing to a greater extent on the effects of the mean- ings associated with a given color .
This theory originated in aesthetics philosophy literature , where Zeltner ( 1975 ) origi- nally conceptualized referential and embodied meanings to explain how aesthetics-related stimuli influence people ’ s per- ceptions .
Drawing from this theory , Zhu and Meyers-Levy ( 2005 ) used the referential and embodied meanings of music to explain how music influences customers ’ perceptions ( i.e. , how music conveys a meaningful message to customers ) .
Labrecque and Milne ( 2012 ) applied this theory to color , call- ing it the referential meaning of color , and used the resulting conceptual framework to explain the effect of color on brand personality .
The embodied part of the theory refers to the meanings intrinsic to stimuli that evoke hedonic or valenced feelings ( Labrecque and Milne 2012 ; Meyers-Levy and Zhu 2010 ) .
For example , the embodied meaning conveyed through red evokes arousal , and blue elicits feelings related to happiness ( Bagchi and Cheema 2013 ; Hemphill 1996 ) .
Although the referential meaning framework was not a dominant conceptual framework in early color marketing lit- erature , color associations have been studied as a topic in color psychology literature ( Elliot and Maier 2014 ; Whitfield and Wiltshire 1990 ) and a few earlier studies in color marketing literature have investigated color–meaning associations .
For example , consumers ’ color preference for certain logos or brands have been found to vary across cultures because of dissimilarities in the meanings of the color activated by col- or–meaning associations ( Block and Kramer 2009 ; Madden et al .
2000 ) .
In this study , we explore the effect of the color gold , which is associated with status perception ( discussed in greater detail below ) ; thus , we apply the referential meaning of color as the theoretical framework for our hypotheses .
In the next section , we review works on color–meaning associa- tions to identify the meaning associated with the color gold in order to develop our hypotheses from a referential meaning perspective .
Color–meaning associations Color possesses not only aes- thetic value but also informative value that conveys a specific meaning ( Elliot et al .
2007 ) .
Repeated pairings of colors and particular concepts or messages create a strong or implicit learned color association over time .
As a result , even the mere presence of color in a particular situation activates color asso- ciations ( Elliot et al .
2007 ; Elliot and Maier 2014 ) .
The color gold is often associated with status con- cepts ( Drèze and Nunes 2009 ) .
Status is defined as an individual ’ s position or ranking in society and is asso- ciated with entitlement , prestige , exclusivity , admiration , and respect from others ( Anderson et al .
2015 ; Drèze and Nunes 2009 ) .1 Consistent with this concept , it is customary to award golden trophies or gold medals for the first place in competitions , as is done for example , in the Olympics ( Drèze and Nunes 2009 ) .
Words that begin with Bgolden^ are considered the first or the best ( e.g. , golden age , golden voice ) .
Consumers are likely to develop a gold–status association through repeated pairings in marketing practices as well .
For example , gold is one of the most widely used color hues to con- vey the meaning of wealth and status in marketing prac- tices .
Specific examples include gold labels being wide- ly used in companies ’ loyalty programs to symbolize high status and exclusive benefits for their loyal cus- tomers ( e.g. , American Airlines ’ gold membership card ) .
1 Power is conceptually different from status .
Unlike status , which is deter- mined by Bthe eyes of others , ^ power is defined as the ability to influence others through control over resources or through the capacity to punish them ( Anderson et al .
2015 ; Emerson 1962 ; Fiske 1993 ; Magee andGalinsky 2008 ) .
J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 319 T ab le 1 Su m m ar y of ke y st ud ie s on th e ef fe ct s of co lo r in m ar ke tin g St ud y C on te xt W ha tc ol or ( I V ) W ha te ff ec t ( D V ) T he or et ic al fr am ew or k M ai n fi nd in gs A tti tu di na l B eh av io ra l B ab in et al .
( 20 03 ) , JB R R et ai lw al lc ol or O ra ng e vs .b lu e ( H ue ) Pu rc ha se in te nt io ns an d pr ic e fa ir ne ss A ff ec tiv e an d co gn iti ve ev al ua tio ns C ol or an d lig ht to ge th er af fe ct ed pe rc ei ve d pr ic e fa ir ne ss an d pu rc ha se in te nt io ns th ro ug h af fe ct iv e an d co gn iti ve re sp on se s. B el liz zi an d H ite ( 1 99 2 ) , P sy ch ol og y an d M ar ke tin g Sh op pi ng en vi ro nm en t ( b ac kg ro un d co lo r of m er ch an di se ) R ed vs .b lu e ( H ue ) Pl ea su re , d om in an ce , ar ou sa l , pu rc ha se in te nt io n Sh op pi ng tim e A ro us al an d af fe ct iv e di m en si on of co lo r B lu e ( v s. re d ) sh op pi ng en vi ro nm en tl ea ds to m or e po si tiv e cu st om er ou tc om es in cl ud in g m or e si m ul at ed pu rc ha se s , fe w er pu rc ha se po st po ne m en ta nd st ro ng er in te nt io ns to sh op an d br ow se .A ff ec tiv e pe rc ep tio n of co lo r ra th er th an ar ou sa ld im en si on of co lo r m ay be re sp on si bl e fo r th is ou tc om e. B el liz zi et al .
( 19 83 ) , JR R et ai le rs ’ in te ri or co lo r C oo lv s. w ar m co lo r : re d , ye llo w , g re en , bl ue an d w hi te ( H ue ) Pe rc ei ve d st or e en vi ro nm en t an d pr od uc t A pp ro ac h or ie nt at io n ( P hy si ca la ttr ac tio n ) E va lu at io n W ar m co lo rs ( v s. co ol co lo rs ) ph ys ic al ly at tr ac t , ho w ev er , i tp ro du ce d le ss po si tiv e re sp on se s ( v s. co ol co lo rs ) in ev al ua tio n fa ct or su ch as re la xe d or fa vo ra bl e. C ro w le y ( 1 99 3 ) , M ar ke tin g le tte rs R et ai l : in te ri or co lo r of fu rn itu re st or e R ed , y el lo w , g re en , bl ue ( H ue ) A ro us al an d ev al ua tio n of en vi ro nm en ta nd m er ch an di se .
A ro us al -e va lu at io n E va lu at iv e ef fe ct s ar e m os tp os iti ve ( m or e pl ea sa nt ) in co ol co lo rs , w he re as w ar m co lo rs ar e m or e ar ou si ng .T w o di m en si on s of co lo r ( a ro us al -e va lu at io n ) ar e su gg es te d as th eo re tic al fr am ew or k fo r co lo r ef fe ct s. G or n et al .
( 19 97 ) , M gt .S ci en ce A dv er tis in g C hr om a , va lu e an d hu e ( r ed vs .b lu e ) Fe el in gs an d at tit ud e to w ar d ad an d br an d A ro us al an d he do ni c st at e H ig h sa tu ra tio n in cr ea se s lik ab ili ty th ro ug h fe el in gs of ex ci te m en t. H ig h va lu e in cr ea se s lik ab ili ty th ro ug h fe el in gs of re la xa tio n. L oh se an d R os en ( 2 00 1 ) , J A A dv er tis in g Fu ll co lo r vs .b la ck ( h ue ) A tti tu de to w ar d an d ad ve rt is er an d ad .
C ol or ca n si gn al pr od uc tq ua lit y an d cr ed ib ili ty of pr in te d ad s. B ag ch ia nd C he em a ( 2 01 3 ) , J C R O nl in e au ct io n , ba ck gr ou nd co lo r R ed vs .b lu e ( H ue ) W ill in gn es s to pa y A uc tio n bi dd in g ( $ ) A ro us al R ed ba ck gr ou nd s in cr ea se bi dd in g pr ic e in on lin e au ct io n , w he re as it de cr ea se s pr ic e of fe r in ne go tia tio n , be ca us e re d in du ce s ag gr es si ve ne ss th ro ug h ar ou sa l. G or n et al .
( 20 04 ) , JM R O nl in e , sc re en co lo r H ue , c ho rm a an d va lu e Pe rc ei ve d do w nl oa d qu ic kn es s , at tit ud e to w ar d an d lik el ih oo d to re co m m en d w eb si te Fe el in gs of re la xa tio n A ll th re e co lo r di m en si on s of ba ck gr ou nd sc re en co lo r in fl ue nc e pe rc ei ve d do w nl oa d qu ic kn es s th ro ug h fe el in gs of re la xa tio n , w hi ch w ou ld in tu rn in fl ue nc es at tit ud e to w ar d w eb si te an d lik el ih oo d of re co m m en da tio n of th e w eb si te to ot he rs .
K al tc he va an d W ei tz ( 2 00 6 ) , J M O nl in e sh op pi ng ( v is ua le le m en ts of on lin e sh op pi ng ) C ol or w ar m th ( w ar m vs .c ol d co lo r ) an d sa tu ra tio n Pu rc ha se in te nt io n an d pl ea sa nt ne ss of sh op pi ng en vi ro nm en t A ro us al C on su m er s ’ m ot iv at io na lo ri en ta tio n m od er at es th e ef fe ct of ar ou sa lp ro du ce d by a st or e en vi ro nm en t ( co lo r ) on th e pl ea sa nt ne ss of th e en vi ro nm en t. H ig h ar ou sa lh as a po si tiv e ef fe ct on pl ea sa nt ne ss fo r re cr ea tio na l- or ie nt ed co ns um er s , bu tf or th os e w ho ha ve a ta sk -o ri en ta te d m ot iv at io na lo ri en ta tio n , it de cr ea se s pl ea sa nt ne ss .
L ab re cq ue an d M iln e ( 2 01 2 ) , J A M S B ra nd in g H ue , s at ur at io n an d va lu e B ra nd pe rs on al ity , pu rc ha se in te nt io n E m bo di ed -r ef er en tia l m ea ni ng of co lo r H ue , s at ur at io n an d va lu e in fl ue nc ed br an d pe rs on al ity , l og o sh ap e an d lik ab ili ty .P ac ka ge co lo r an d br an d pe rs on al ity ne ed s to be al ig ne d to in cr ea se pu rc ha se in te nt io n. 320 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 These prevalent practices help reinforce perceptions re- lated to color–status associations .
Research shows that customers in gold and silver tiers perceive themselves as top-tier customers who hold higher status than others , whereas those in blue and yellow tiers do not , implying that the color gold conveys the notion of hierarchy and status ( Drèze and Nunes 2009 ) .
In sum , it can be pos- ited that consumers associate the color gold with status .
Drawing from the referential meaning of color , we hypoth- esize that this gold–status association is activated when con- sumers encounter the color gold in a service landscape , which influences their subsequent behavior .
Atmospherics and service props The influence of atmospheric elements ( e.g. , color , light , music , and scent ) on consumer behavior is well docu- mented in the literature ( Bitner 1992 ; Biswas et al .
2016 ; Singh 2006 ) .
For example , Madzharov et al .
( 2015 ) found that semantic associations of a warm ( vs. cool ) scent in retail atmospherics influence customers ’ spatial perceptions , which , in turn , increases power res- toration motivation and subsequently enhances the pur- chase of premium brands .
More recently , Biswas et al .
( 2017 ) examined the role of light in atmospherics and found that changing the ambient light influences restau- rant patrons ’ alertness levels and their tendency to order healthy versus unhealthy foods .
These studies suggest that subtle cues in atmospherics impact customers ’ be- haviors by influencing their perceptions toward the en- vironment and self .
In a similar vein , service literature has recognized the importance of subtle atmospheric el- ements in service environments because such elements contribute to the creation of customer experiences and shape customers ’ perceptions of the service provider ( Baker and Cameron 1996 ; Berry et al .
2006 ; Bolton et al .
2014 ) .
Service props are a subtle , but important , aspect of atmospheric elements in service settings ( Fisk et al .
2008 ) .
Using the analogy of props in the stage of a ser- vice performance , Fisk et al .
( 2008 ) referred to the objects in a service delivery process as service props ( e.g. , restau- rant booth , airline seat , or hotel bedding ) and proposed that they can contribute to and shape consumers ’ percep- tions of the overall service atmosphere and experience ( Bolton et al .
2014 ; Fisk et al .
2008 ; Haeckel et al .
2003 ) .
Thus , we posit that the colors of service props can shape consumers ’ perceptions of the service experi- ence .
In sum , these literature streams support the notion that gold–status associations activated by the color of ser- vice props should influence consumers ’ perceptions of the service atmosphere and experience .
These perceptionsTa bl e 1 ( c on tin ue d ) St ud y C on te xt W ha tc ol or ( I V ) W ha te ff ec t ( D V ) T he or et ic al fr am ew or k M ai n fi nd in gs A tti tu di na l B eh av io ra l M ad de n et al .
( 20 00 ) , Jo ur na lo f In te rn at io na l M ar ke tin g B ra nd in g H ue , b lu e , gr ee n , w hi te , bl ac k , re d , or an ge , ye llo w , b ro w n , pu rp le , gr ee n L ik in g of th e co lo r , lo go co lo r pr ef er en ce s , co lo r m ea ni ng s C ol or -m ea ni ng as so ci at io n T he re ar e cr os s- cu ltu ra lp at te rn s of bo th si m ila ri ty an d di ss im ila ri ty in co lo r pr ef er en ce s an d co lo r m ea ni ng as so ci at io ns .C ol or -m ea ni ng as so ci at io ns ar e de pe nd en to n cu ltu ra lb ac kg ro un d , th er ef or e cu ltu re ne ed s to be co ns id er ed to m an ag e br an d an d co rp or at e im ag e ac ro ss in te rn at io na lm ar ke ts .
T hi s st ud y Se rv ic e , re st au ra nt at m os ph er ic s G ol d T ip pi ng ( $ ) R ef er en tia l m ea ni ng of co lo r G ol d in re st au ra nt at m os ph er ic s in cr ea se s cu st om er ’ s tip pi ng th ro ug h ac tiv at io n of re fe re nt ia lm ea ni ng , s ta tu s pe rc ep tio n. N ot e : JA = Jo ur na l of A dv er tis in g , JA M S = Jo ur na l of th e A ca de m y of M ar ke tin g Sc ie nc e , JB R = Jo ur na l of B us in es s R es ea rc h , JC R = Jo ur na l of C on su m er R es ea rc h , JM = Jo ur na l of M ar ke tin g , JM R = Jo ur na lo f M ar ke tin g R es ea rc h , JR = Jo ur na lo f R et ai lin g , M gt .S ci en ce = M an ag em en tS ci en ce J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 321 about the service atmosphere and experience should in turn influence tip amounts .
Tipping Tipping is a prevalent consumer behavior that allows cus- tomers to set the price of a portion of a service offering ( Lynn et al .
1993 ) .
Consistent with prior research , we concep- tualize tipping in percentage terms in all our studies .
Although tipping is widely accepted as a voluntary payment behavior that demonstrates consumers ’ appreciation and gratitude to- ward service providers , surprisingly , prior research has docu- mented that tip amount has a weak relationship with server ’ s efforts , restaurant ’ s food , or even service quality ( Azar 2007a ; Kwortnik et al .
2009 ; Lynn and Grassman 1990 ; Lynn and Latane 1984 ; Lynn et al .
1993 ) .
Several empirical studies have instead identified several drivers of tipping behavior that are extraneous to the specific service or meal quality .
For exam- ple , prior research has documented the relationships between tip amount and weather conditions or even specific character- istics of the servers ( such as servers ’ gender , body shape , hair color , amount of cosmetics , and customer touching behavior ) ( Guéguen 2012 ; Jacob et al .
2010 ; May 1980 ; Rind and Bordia 1996 ; Stephen and Zweigenhaft 1986 ) .
Although color has not gained much attention as a research topic in this liter- ature stream , a few recent works have tested color as a manip- ulation stimulus that improves servers ’ physical attractiveness ( e.g. , lipstick , clothing , or hair color ) ( Guéguen 2012 ; Guéguen and Jacob 2012 , 2014 ; Lynn et al .
2016 ) .
Another stream of research on the motivations for tipping has sug- gested that tipping is a largely norm-driven behavior ( Azar 2007b ; Lynn et al .
1993 ) .
For example , it has been found that customers leave a tip to adhere to social norms and to avoid feeling guilty for not leaving one ( Lynn and McCall 2000 ; Lynn 1997 ; Lynn et al .
1993 ) .
In relation to the social norm perspectives , different tipping customs across countries suggest that consumers use tipping , in part , as a tool for status display ( Azar 2007b ; Lynn 1997 ) .
For instance , tipping was found to be more prevalent in coun- tries where achievement or status is highly valued ( Lynn et al .
1993 ) .
Consistent with this , historical accounts suggest that tipping could be related to an individual ’ s motivation toward status .
Historically , tipping has been used as a tool to display an individual ’ s status , as the custom of tipping allows wealthy consumers to demonstrate their socioeconomic status to them- selves , their guests , or their servers ( Lynn 1997 ; Shamir 1984 ) .
Although there are differing views as to whether tipping started in 16th century Europe or whether it was prevalent in the Roman era , scholars agree that tipping originated as a socioeconomic status feature ( Azar 2004 ) , whereby individ- uals of economically higher status ( i.e. , wealthy ) gave tips to people of economically lower status .
In essence , tip amount is , therefore , likely to be influenced by the tipper ’ s desire for status and status display ( Azar 2007b ; Conlin et al .
2003 ; Lynn 1997 ; Lynn and Grassman 1990 ; Lynn and Sturman 2003 ; Lynn et al .
1993 ) .
The idea that tipping is , in part , driven by a desire for status display ( Lynn 1997 ; Shamir 1984 ) suggests that customers are likely to leave a generous tip when their status perception becomes salient .
Applying this to a referential meaning per- spective , it can be hypothesized that gold-colored service props will activate consumers ’ gold–status associations , which would , in turn , make their status perceptions salient .
This will lead consumers to leave larger tips since they are likely to display their status perception activated by the gold- colored service props through tipping .
More formally , H1 : Consumers presented with a gold-colored service prop will leave a larger tip ( % ) than consumers presented with a non-gold-colored ( e.g. , black or white ) service prop .
Underlying process for effects of gold color on tipping behavior In her seminal piece on servicescape , Bitner ( 1992 ) suggested that atmospherics usually affect individuals ’ perceptions of the environment itself first , which would , in turn , generate individuals ’ internal responses and subsequent behaviors .
Multiple studies have supported this conceptual framework by showing that atmospherics influence customers ’ percep- tions of a service provider .
For example , customers attribute service failure to service organizations more frequently when they see that service environments are disorganized ( vs. well- organized ) ( Bitner 1990 ) .
In a similar vein , it has also been proposed that atmospherics in a servicescape can be an extrin- sic cue for customers to infer the quality of service and that of the service provider ( Baker et al .
1994 ; Bitner 1992 ; Zeithaml 1988 ) .
Customers infer restaurant service quality from facility aesthetics , including interior design and décor ( Heung and Gu 2012 ) .
Along the same line , it has been suggested that service props influence customers ’ perceptions of the service- providing organization because they create the overall atmo- sphere ( Berry et al .
2006 ; Fisk et al .
2008 ) .
These perceptions of the environment itself could influence self-perception in service contexts such as restaurant settings , because being in a restaurant and consuming its services could be regarded as possession of the restaurant ’ s services , whereby they become part of the extended self , similar to possessed objects ( Belk 1988 ) .
Building on this relationship among service props , overall perceptions of atmospherics , and their influence on self-per- ception , we propose that gold-colored service props influence consumers ’ perceptions of the restaurant itself , which would , in turn , affect consumers ’ self-perception , leading to the gen- eration of subsequent behavior .
Applying this to the referential 322 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 meaning of color framework , we propose a serial mediation mechanism of the effect of gold , such that encountering gold- colored service props activates consumers ’ status perceptions of a restaurant , which , in turn , elevates individuals ’ self-status perception , subsequently increasing the amount they leave as tip .
Formally , H2 : The effect of a gold-colored service prop on tipping amount will be serially mediated by status perception such that : a gold colored ( vs. non-gold colored ) service prop → increased restaurant status perceptions → in- creased self-status perception → tip amount ( % ) .
Across five studies , we test our hypotheses using a bill folder ( Studies 1 , 3 , 4 , and 5 ) and tablecloth ( Study 2 ) to manipulate the color of service props .
We use these service props as manipulation instruments for twomain reasons : First , both of them are managerially relevant because they are rela- tively easy and inexpensive to change on short notice ( as compared to the color of interior décor ) .
Second , bill folders and tablecloths are the service props that customers encounter with a high physical proximity in a dining situation , and thus their colors have greater exposure for customers and can also be more salient .
Study 1 : the effect of the color gold on tipping Design , participants , and procedure Study 1 , a field experiment , tested H1 that encountering a gold-colored service prop ( a bill folder in this study ) increases tipping .
We tested gold-colored bill folders against black- colored folders because black ones are commonly used in restaurants .
We conducted a two-week field experiment at an independently owned ( i.e. , non-chain ) restaurant during lunch hours .
During these two weeks , a total of 252 customers had lunch at the restaurant , and these customers ’ payment amounts were recorded .
Across all studies , anyone tipping above and below three standard deviations of the mean were removed , consistent with the approach of prior studies ( Mandel and Johnson 2002 ; Rucker et al .
2011 ) .
In Study 1 , this resulted in 17 participants being removed , yielding 235 participants for analysis .
Two participants were excluded from Study 2 based on the same criterion .
In Studies 3 , 4 , and 5 , tipping did not fall outside this range ; hence , no respondents were removed from those studies based on this criterion .
During the first week of the field experiment ( Monday through Saturday ) , only gold bill folders were presented to 119 customers .
In the second week , only black bill folders were presented to 116 customers .
This method ensured that the day of the week was not an influencing factor .
It should also be noted that there were no special events or holidays during these two weeks .
To rule out the possibility of design differences such as size and texture of the bill folder , we made certain that both folders were identical except for their color ( see Fig .
1 ) .We collected data from the merchant copy of each customer ’ s receipt , including the price of the meal , tip amount in dollars , payment method ( credit card or cash ) , and server name.2 The restaurant did not suggest pre-calculated tips on the receipts , nor did they add any automatic tip to the check for parties greater than a certain size .
Results and discussion To test H1 , we conducted an ANCOVA .
Tip percentage ( tip amount divided by meal price including tax ) was the depen- dent measure , and color of the bill folder ( gold vs. black ) was the independent variable .
Based on the tipping literature , we included several factors that might influence tipping as covar- iates : server , payment method , and day of the week ( Lynn et al .
1993 ) .
Consistent with H1 , the results of the ANCOVA analysis revealed the effect of the bill folder color .
Specifically , customers presented with the gold-colored bill folder left higher tip amounts than those presented with the black-colored bill folder ( Mgold = 21.5 % vs. Mblack = 18.9 % ; F ( 1226 ) = 4.76 , p < .05 ) .
Additionally , we explored whether there were any interactions between color and payment mech- anism ( cash vs. credit card ) , server , server gender , and day of the week on tipping behaviors .
No significant interactions were found ( all p-values > .20 ) .
In sum , the first study—a field experiment—revealed that encountering a gold-colored service prop increased con- sumers ’ tipping amount .
Although this study provided support for the existence of our hypothesized gold effect , it has limi- tations in terms of the limited controls and measures of extra- neous variables ( e.g. , individual customers ’ mood or involve- ment in tipping ) that might influence tip amounts .
We address these concerns in the following studies .
Study 2 : robustness of the gold effect Study 1 showed that customers who encounter gold-colored ( vs. black-colored ) bill folders leave larger tips .
Although this gold effect supports H1 , it is limited to one service prop , the bill folder .
Moreover , one might have concerns about double money-priming effects .
That is , the gold-colored bill folder might prime money thoughts twice because a bill folder may be associated with a payment check and the color gold can also be associatedwithmoney .
Thus , a gold-colored bill folder might heighten the accessibility of the idea of money twice 2 Since individual ’ s identifiable information could not be collected , returning customers were not captured .
When customers left a tip in cash , wait staff noted the tip amount on the merchant copy of the receipt .
J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 323 ( Vohs 2006 ) .
This double money-priming effect can potential- ly influence our results because even a subtle reminder of money can change subsequent consumer behavior ( Vohs 2006 ; Vohs et al .
2008 ) .
Study 2 attempted to address this concern by investigating a different service prop—the table- cloth .
Therefore , the purpose of Study 2 was twofold : ( 1 ) to extend the gold color effect beyond the bill folder context by examining the effects of the color gold in tablecloths and ( 2 ) to rule out alternative explanations related to the double money- priming effect because tablecloths are not related to money/ tipping as are bill folders .
Design , participants , and procedure Study 2 involved two manipulated conditions—gold- vs. white-colored tablecloths .
White was used as the control/ comparison color because white tablecloths are used common- ly in fine-dining restaurants ( Allen 2009 ) and the color that is considered neutral ( Kay and Regier 2003 ) .
To enhance ecolog- ical validity and realism , we designed the lab experiment such that the participants could actually experience the atmospheric element of the tablecloth .
The settings for the experiments were labs with identical tables and lighting , no windows , and all other atmospheric elements constant between the rooms .
We set up tables in a manner similar to that at actual restaurants .
Tabletop items included tablecloths ( gold vs. white ) , plates , cutlery , salt and pepper shakers , and glasses .
To avoid potential confounds related to presence of other colors , we used non- colored , transparent tableware ( See Fig .
2 for tabletops ) .
Sixty-nine undergraduate students enrolled in marketing courses ( average age = 21.1 years old , 42 % male ) at a major US university were assigned randomly to the two manipulated conditions ( tablecloth color : gold vs. white ) ; the participants received course credit for participation .
To eliminate the po- tential influence of presence of others on tipping , only one participant at a time was assigned to each room .
We told the participants that we were running a survey on a restaurant .
Upon entering the lab , the participants were seated and re- ceived brief instructions asking them to describe the atmosphere of the room and the tabletop so that the respon- dents had time to look around the room before completing the survey .
Subsequently , a scenario was presented to the partici- pants .
In both conditions , participants read the following sce- nario : BYou ’ ve just been seated in this restaurant .
Imagine that you are dining in this restaurant .
After having your meal , you are presented with a check in a bill folder .
You open the bill folder and find the receipt like the one below .
Your meal cost $ 15.72 .
Please indicate your tip for the server and sign the receipt just like you would in an actual restaurant situation.^ A mock check that included a line to record a tip was present- ed to them without a bill folder at the end of the scenario .
The bill folder was not presented in this study to avoid the potential effects of bill folder color .
The meal price was $ 15.72 , which was higher than the average meal price in Study 1 ( i.e. , $ 11 ) to test tip percentage at a different price level .
Results and discussion Participants were randomly assigned to the gold ( n = 35 ) or white tablecloth ( n = 34 ) condition .
Based on extant tipping studies that have identified customers ’ demographic factors ( such as gender and age ) as factors that influence tipping ( Conlin et al .
2003 ; Lynn et al .
1993 ) , we controlled partici- pants ’ age and gender.3 To avoid any potential idiosyncrasies due to meal time ( Madzharov et al .
2015 ) , we included time of day as an additional covariate.4 Tipping behavior Data were analyzed using ANCOVA to compare the tipping percentage in gold versus white condi- tions .
Consistent with the gold effect found in Study 1 , tipping in the Bgold^ condition was significantly higher than tipping in the Bwhite^ condition ( Mgold = 22.94 % vs. Mwhite = 20.33 % ; F ( 1 , 64 ) = 5.86 , p < .05 ) .
The difference in tipping between the gold and the white tablecloth conditions suggests that the 3 Age and gender were not significant covariates in Studies 2 , 3 , and 4 .
In Study 5 , gender was not a significant covariate but age was ( F ( 1,79 ) = 11.32 , p < .001 ) .
4 Time of day was not a significant covariate .
Black Gold Orange Fig .
1 Bill folders used across studies 324 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 effect of the color gold extends to service prop contexts beyond the bill folder .
This enhances the generalizability of our find- ings to a broader service landscape .
Moreover , our findings rule out the potential alternative explanation related to the dou- ble money-priming effect .
Study 3 : status as a mediation mechanism The consistent results of Studies 1 and 2 provide evi- dence that encountering the color gold increases tipping .
Study 3 investigated the mediation mechanism underly- ing this gold effect and , specifically , status perceptions through the referential meaning of the color gold .
Specifically , Study 3 was designed to test H2 , which proposes serial mediation in the following form : color of service prop → perceived restaurant status → per- ceived self-status → tipping ( % ) .
Additionally , we ruled out possible alternative mediators such as mood and involvement .
Design , participants , and procedure Study 3 was conducted in a lab at a major US university .
Eighty-eight undergraduate students enrolled in marketing courses participated in this study ( average age = 21.8 years old , 55.7 % male ) for course credit .
The study tested two ma- nipulated conditions ( color of bill folder : gold vs. black ) .
The participants were randomly assigned to the gold bill folder ( n = 45 ) or the black bill folder ( n = 43 ) condition and the study was run across several sessions .
There were up to 10 participants in each session .
Each participant was given a packet containing instructions , a picture of the restaurant , bill folder with a mock receipt inside ( see Fig .
3 ) , and question- naire .
They were guided to follow the instructions and answer the questions .
The participants were first given the following scenario : You are dining during lunch hours in the pictured restaurant [ same picture shown across conditions ] .
The same bill folders as in Study 1 were used ( See Fig .
1 ) .
At the end of the scenario , the participants were instructed to open the bill folder , take out the receipt from the folder , indicate a tip amount , and sign the receipt , just as they would at an actual restaurant .
The receipt indicated the total cost of the meal as $ 11 ( the average meal price in Study 1 ) .
Next , the participants were asked to evaluate the restaurant ’ s status with the help of two items ( Bthis restaurant is special^ and Bthis restaurant has a high degree of status^ ; α = .70 ) , in addition to self-status ( BI feel special in this restaurant , ^ BI have attained a high degree of status in this restaurant , ^ and BI have more status in this restaurant relative to other customers^ ; α = .63 ) .
They were also asked to rate their mood ( feeling good , pleasant , happy , positive ; α = .94 ) and involvement in tipping ( Btipping is important , ^ Ba concern to me , ^ Brelevant , ^ and Bmatters to me^ ; α = .92 ) .
All items were anchored on seven-point scales ( 1 = strongly disagree , 7 = strongly agree ) .
We measured perceptions of restaurant and self-status by adapting scales developed by Drèze and Nunes ( 2009 ) .
To rule out possible alternative explanations , mood and involvement were measured using existing scales ( Allen and Janiszewski 1989 ; Bower and Landreth 2001 ) .
Appendix Table 5 provides details pertaining to each of the scales and measures used in Study 3 .
See Appendix Table 6 for the composite reliabil- ities , AVEs , and CFA factor loadings .
Appendix Table 7 shows the correlations of the variables used in Study 3 .
Similar to the approach employed in Study 2 and also based on prior research ( Conlin et al .
2003 ; Lynn et al .
1993 ) , age and gender were used as covariates .
Results Tipping We performed an ANCOVA on the tip percentage ( DV ) with the bill folder color as the independent variable while controlling for age and gender .
The tip percentage was calculated by having the tip amount divided by meal price ( $ 11 ) .
Consistent with the results of Studies 1 and 2 , the Gold Tablecloth Condition White Tablecloth ConditionFig .
2 Tabletops in Study 2 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 325 ANCOVA revealed a significant main effect of service prop color ( F ( 1,84 ) = 6.42 , p < .05 ) .
The participants presented with gold-colored bill folder left a larger tip ( M = 26.52 % , SD = 8.83 ) than the participants presented with the black- colored bill folder ( M = 22.40 % , SD = 5.94 ) .
These results validate H1 .
a Notes : Meal price was $ 11.00 in Study 3 Fig .
3 Scenario and mock receipt in Study 3a , 4 and 5 326 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 Mediation To test the underlying mechanism outlined in H2 ( color of service prop → perceived restaurant status → per- ceived self-status→ tip ( % ) ) , we performed a serial mediation test , using a bias-corrected bootstrap procedure ( Hayes ’ Model 6 ; as recommended in Hayes 2013 ; n = 1000 ) with color as the independent variable , perceived restaurant status and perceived self-status as mediators ( in that sequence ) , and tipping percentage as the dependent variable.We used age and gender as covariates .
Consistent with H2 , the bootstrap results provided statistical evidence of serial mediation effects .
The confidence interval for the indirect path ( color of service prop → perceived restaurant status → perceived self-status → tip ) did not include zero ( 95 % CI = .03 , 1.50 ) , indicating support for H2.5 Specifically , the analysis revealed that a gold-colored ( vs. black-colored ) service prop predicted perceived restaurant status with marginal significance ( a1 = .40 , p < .1 ) , and per- ceived restaurant status predicted self-status perception ( d21 = .45 , p < .001 ) , which , in turn , predicted tip amount in percentage ( b2 = 2.03 , p < .05 ) .
Thus , as was hypothesized from the referential meaning perspective , the color gold exerted its influence on consumers ’ tipping behavior through its referential meaning , namely , status perception .
See Table 2 and Fig .
46 for the results .
These results provide process evi- dence of the indirect effect of the color gold on tipping.7 To rule out mood and involvement as possible under- lying processes , we examined whether color affected mood or involvement and found non-significant results ( Mood : F ( 1,86 ) = 2.91 , ns ; Involvement : F ( 1,85 ) = .23 , ns ) .
Next , we ran simple mediation tests to check wheth- er mood or involvement mediates the effect of color on tipping .
The results showed no significant indirect effects for either variable ( color → involvement → tipping , 95 % CI [ -.22 , .80 ] ; color → mood → tipping , 95 % CI [ -.10 , 1.29 ] ) .
Finally , we assessed our serial mediation model while controlling for each variable .
For involvement , the results of our serial mediation model were the same , showing significance at a 95 % CI [ .01 , 1.42 ] .
When mood was used as a covariate , the serial mediation mod- el was marginally significant at 90 % CI [ .01 and .81 ] .
Based on these results , we ruled out mood or involve- ment as possible mediators .
In sum , the results of Study 3 support H1 and H2 .
Next , Study 4 examines the possible role of novelty of gold-colored folders .
Study 4 : examining the role of novelty It can be argued that novelty of the color gold might drive our previous findings because gold-colored service props are more novel than props of the other colors used in Studies 1–3 ( e.g. , black and white ) .
If the nov- elty of the color leads to the perception of status , which in turn increases tipping , one could hypothesize that any novel color would lead to an increase in tipping .
Study 4 was designed to rule out this potential alternative explanation by examining tipping when customers en- countered a bill folder of a color that is perceived as being equally novel as the gold-colored bill folder .
While Study 1 was a field study , Studies 2 and 3 were conducted with student participants ; Study 4 enhances the robustness of our findings by using a more diverse consumer base ( MTurk panel ) .
Pretest First , we conducted a within-subject pretest to determine the stimuli for Study 4 : a bill folder color that is per- ceived to be as novel as the color gold .
Fifty partici- pants were recruited through an online ( MTurk ) panel ( median age = 40–45 years old , 52 % male ) in exchange for monetary compensation ( $ 1 ) .
The respondents 5 These results are a combination of two datasets that were collapsed .
In the first round of data collection , 76 participants were randomly assigned to the black-colored bill folder condition ( n = 39 ) or the gold-colored bill folder ( n = 37 ) condition .
Tipping in the gold condition ( M = 26.24 % , SD = 8.78 ) was significantly larger than that in the black condition ( M = 22.60 % , SD= 5.63 ) at F ( 1,72 ) = 4.16 , p < .05 .
Serial mediation tests showed a signifi- cant indirect path at the 90 % CI [ .0040 , .1488 ] but failed to establish signifi- cance at the 95 % CI .
Acknowledging the significance of the indirect path at the 90 % CI from the first dataset we collected , we conducted another round of data collection and then collapsed the two datasets into one to ensure that the lack of power would not be a concern in this study .
The two rounds of data collection followed the same procedures ; recruitment , manipulation , and the lab environ- ments were the same .
Table 2 Model summary for the effects color on bill folder through restaurant status and self-status ( Study 3 ) Antecedent Restaurant status Self-status Tipping ( % ) Color ( Black vs. Gold ) .40 * ( .21 ) .11 ( .19 ) .40 ** ( 1.64 ) Restaurant Status – .45 **** ( .09 ) –1.20 ( .94 ) Self-Status – – 2.03** ( .96 ) Constant 4.50 * ( 1.86 ) .90 ( 1.67 ) 14.38 ( 14.65 ) R2 = .07 F ( 3 , 84 ) = 1.95 p = .13 R2 = .25 F ( 4 , 83 ) = 6.9 p < .001 R2 = .12 F ( 5,82 ) = 2.34 p = .05 Notes : Coefficients are unstandardized and presented with standard errors in parenthesis *p < .1 , **p < .05 .
*** p < .01 , **** p < .001 6 This result shows significant serial indirect effects .
However , we do ac- knowledge that the direct effect remains significant , which suggests the exis- tence of additional factors that could be influencing tipping behavior .
7 We tested for a simple mediation effect of status ( either restaurant status or self-status alone as a mediation mechanism ) , however , as predicted only a serial mediation chain was established .
J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 327 completed a computer-based survey .
They were given a scenario of dining at a restaurant .
They were then told that they were presented with a check in a bill folder described as gold , blue , green , red , orange , white , or black .
The respondents were asked to complete a survey about the novelty of each bill folder , that is , they rated the bill folder as being new , unusual , novel , and atypi- cal ( α = .94 ) , where 1 = strongly disagree and 7 = strong- ly agree ( adapted from Cox and Cox 2002 ) .
The pretest results showed that the orange-colored bill folder was perceived to be as novel as the gold-colored folder ( Mgold = 5.33 vs. Morange = 5.45 ; t ( 49 ) = -.998 , p = .32 ) .
As expected , the black-colored bill folder was perceived as being the least novel ( Mblack = 2.23 , SD = 1.23 ) .
Based on these pretest findings , we chose the orange- colored bill folder for testing against the gold-colored bill folder .
Design , participants , and procedure In the main study , ninety-five participants recruited through an online ( MTurk ) panel ( median age = 26–30 ; male 58 % ) participated in exchange for monetary com- pensation ( $ 1 ) .
The participants were presented with a scenario featuring a restaurant photo ( same as the photo from Study 3 ; see Fig .
3 ) .
The meal price was $ 15.72 ( the same as in Study 2 ) .
Except for color ( gold vs. orange ) , the bill folder image was the same as the one used in previous studies ( see Fig .
1 ) .
The participants were given a hypothetical scenario of dining in a res- taurant .
A bill folder and receipt were displayed on the screen .
Then , they were asked to indicate a tip amount .
Next , the participants were asked to evaluate the restau- rant ’ s status ( Bthis restaurant is special , ^ Bthis restaurant has a high degree of status , ^ Bthis restaurant has more status relative to other restaurants , ^ and Bthis restaurant seems upscale^ ; α = .91 ) ,8 self-status ( BI feel special in this restaurant , ^ BI have attained a high degree of status in this restaurant , ^ and BI have more status in this res- taurant relative to other customers^ ; α = .77 ) , and nov- elty of the bill folder ( same items as used in the pretest ; α = .84 ) .
All items were anchored on seven-point scales ( 1 = strongly disagree , 7 = strongly agree ) .
See Appendix Table 5 for details regarding the scales and measures .
Correlations , composite reliabilities , AVEs and CFA fac- tor loadings are given in Appendix Tables 60 and 7 .
As in Studies 2 and 3 , we used participants ’ age and gen- der as covariates ( Conlin et al .
2003 ; Lynn et al .
1993 ) .
Results and discussion Manipulation checks At the end of the experiment , the participants were asked to indicate the color of the bill folder they saw at the beginning of the survey .
The three participants who did not answer this question correctly were excluded from our analysis .
As demonstrated in the pretest , the orange- and gold-colored bill folders were per- ceived as equally novel in the main study ( Morange = 4.82 vs. Mgold = 4.58 ; F ( 1,93 ) = .91 , p = .34 ) .
Additionally , to rule out attractiveness of the bill folder as an alternate mechanism , we administered a two-item scale about the attractiveness of the bill folders adapted from Biswas et al .
( 2014b ) ( the bill folder looks very good in terms of visual appearance ; the bill folder is very attractive ; r = .87 ) .
The results showed no significant differences between the orange- and gold-colored bill folders on attractiveness ( Morange = 5.16 vs. Mgold = 5.51 ; F ( 1,93 ) = 2.46 , p > .10 ) .
Tipping As in Studies 2 and 3 , we ran an ANCOVA on the tip amount ( DV ) with the service prop color ( orange vs. gold ) as the independent variable and age and gender as covariates .
We found that tipping in the gold condition was marginally higher than in the orange condition ( Mgold = 22.04 % vs. Morange = 19.80 % ; F ( 1,91 ) = 3.37 , p < .10 ) .
If tipping is a function of the novelty of bill folder color , the orange-colored bill folders should have yielded similar tipping behaviors as the gold-colored 8 We added two items to restaurant status perception from Study 3 to make it a multi-item scale .
Notes : Coefficients Black vs. Gold are unstandardize Restaura status d. * p < .1 , ** p < .05 , *** p < .01 , **** p < .001 nt Self-status Tip Fig .
4 The effects of color ( gold vs. black ) on bill folder on tipping through restaurant status and self-status ( Study 3 ) 328 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 folders because orange was perceived to be as novel as gold ; however , the orange-colored folders did not yield similar tipping behaviors .
Mediation Our primary interest was to demonstrate that the gold condition ( in comparison to the orange condi- tion ) was a function of status and not novelty alone .
As we did in Study 3 , we tested whether the color gold ( vs. orange ) affects tipping percentage through restau- rant status and self-status perception .
We performed a serial mediation test by using a bias-corrected bootstrap procedure ( Hayes ’ s Model 6 ; as recommended in Hayes 2013 with service prop color as the independent vari- able , perceived restaurant and perceived self-status as mediators ( in that sequence ) , and tipping percentage ( tip amount divided by meal price , $ 15.72 ) as the de- pendent variable .
The confidence interval of the indirect path ( color of service prop → perceived restaurant status → perceived self-status → tip ( % ) ) did not in- clude zero ( 95 % CI = .20 , 2.03 ; n = 1000 ) , which sug- gests a significant indirect effect ( Zhao et al .
2010 ) .
Specifically , the analysis revealed that the gold-colored ( vs. orange-colored ) service prop enhanced the per- ceived restaurant status ( a1 = .80 , p < .001 ) ; consequent- ly , the perceived restaurant status increased perceived self-status ( d21 = .58 , p < .001 ) , which , in turn , increased the tip ( % ) ( b2 = 1.64 , p < .05 ) .
Thus , the participants who encountered a gold-colored ( vs. orange-colored ) service prop perceived that they were in a restaurant of higher status , which , in turn , enhanced their own perceived status and , ultimately , led them to leave a bigger tip .
See Table 3 and Fig .
5 for the results.9 These results further support our hypothesis that gold effects are driven by status perception , not by novelty .
In addition , as predicted , the color gold exerted its in- fluence through its referential meaning associated with status perception .
That is , consumers responded to the gold color through restaurant status perception and their tipping behavior was influenced by self-status percep- tion induced by the color gold .
Even though there were no significant differences be- tween the attractiveness of the orange- and gold-colored bill folders , we re-ran the mediation test controlling for attractiveness given the directionality of the means in favor of the gold-colored bill folder .
The results were the same , even when controlling for attractiveness .
In short , the gold-colored bill folder led customers to ele- vate their restaurant status perceptions , which in turn led to enhanced self-status perceptions and , ultimately , in- creased tipping .
Overall , the results of Study 4 were consistent with the mediation mechanism established in Study 3 .
Significant indirect effects of the gold-colored ( vs. or- ange-colored ) bill folder on tipping further supports that status is an underlying mechanism of the gold effect and not a function of novelty or attractiveness of the bill folder .
We provide more conclusive evidence of status perception as a mediation mechanism of the gold effect in Study 5 .
Study 5 : inducing status and its effects on tipping We proposed gold-color induced perceived status as a key underlying factor in influencing the effects of ser- vice prop color on tipping amount .
If this is indeed the underlying factor , the same effects should be obtained when status is induced ( e.g. , through priming ) in the case of non-gold colored service props .
Thus , we pre- dict that H3 : In the absence of any priming , consumers presented with a gold service prop will leave a higher per- centage tip than consumers presented with a non- gold service prop , and this effect will be weakened when status is primed .
Design , participants , and procedure Eighty-five undergraduates enrolled in marketing classes ( average age : 21.5 ; 51 % male ) at a major US university participated in a 2 ( service prop color : gold vs. black ) × 2 ( status : non-primed vs. primed ) between-subjects design experiment .
The participants received course credit for participation .
Bill folders were again used as the service prop in this study .
As in Studies 2 , 3 , and 4 , participants ’ age and gender were used as covariates in the data analysis .
Status manipulation The status prime was adapted from prior research ( Drèze and Nunes 2009 ; Dubois et al .
2012 ) .
Specifically , in the status-primed condition , at the beginning of the survey , the participants were asked to write a short essay about a situation in which they held status ( what happened and how they felt ) .
In the non-primed condition , there was no such essay .
Tipping behavior Next , the participants were presented with the same scenario as in Studies 3 and 4 ( see Fig .
3 ) , featuring the same restaurant photo .
As in 9 This result shows significant serial indirect effects accompanied by signifi- cant direct effects , which suggests the existence of additional factors that could be influencing tipping behavior .
J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 329 Studies 3 and 4 , they were told to imagine that they were dining in the pictured restaurant and presented with a gold- or black-colored bill folder .
Then , they were instructed to open the bill folder and indicate the tip they wanted to leave .
The meal price was $ 15.72 , the same as in Study 4 .
Results and discussion The same attractiveness items measured in Study 4 were used in Study 5 to again rule out attractiveness as an alternative mechanism .
The results showed no differ- ences between the black- and gold-colored bill folders in terms of attractiveness ( Mblack = 5.07 vs. Mgold = 5.33 ; F ( 1,83 ) = .844 , p = .36 ) .
There was a significant color by status interaction ( F ( 1 , 79 ) = 3.99 , p < 0.05 ) .
Consistent with H1 and the findings of our previous studies , in the non-primed condition , tipping in the gold ( vs. black ) condition was significantly higher ( Mgold = 21.92 % vs. Mblack = 17.66 % ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 13.14 , p = .001 ) .
Also , as predicted ( in H3 ) , this effect was weakened when status was primed ( Mgold = 21.66 % vs. Mblack = 20.44 % ; F ( 1 , 34 ) = .08 , p = .78 ) ( see Fig .
6 ) .
There was also a signif- icant priming effect in the black condition .
Tipping in the primed black-colored bill folder condition was mar- ginally higher than in the non-primed black-colored bill folder condition ( Mprimed black = 20.44 % vs. Mnon-pimed black = 17.66 % ; F ( 1 , 35 ) = 3.70 , p < .10 ) .
There were no effects of priming for the gold-colored folder condition ( Mprimed gold = 21.66 % vs. Mnon-pimed gold = 21.92 % ; F ( 1 , 42 ) = 1.08 , p = .30 ) .
Taken together , these results show that tipping in the black condition increased with status priming , while tip- ping in the gold condition stayed the same irrespective of priming because gold is a status-laden color .
The results of the gold , primed condition might indicate ceil- ing effects for a golden atmospheric effect because gold + status priming did not yield significantly higher tipping percentages than the black + status priming con- dition ( i.e. , the two bars on the left in Fig .
6 are not significantly different ) .
In short , tipping increased with status priming .
This priming effect was evident with the non-status-related color , black .
The difference in tipping between the black and gold conditions weakened when status prim- ing was induced .
These findings provide further evi- Table 3 Model summary for the effects color on bill folder through restaurant status and self-status ( Study 4 ) Antecedent Restaurant status Self-status Tipping ( % ) Color ( Orange vs. Gold ) .80 **** ( .21 ) –.05 ( .19 ) 2.53 * ( 1.36 ) Restaurant Status – .
58 **** ( .09 ) –1.09 ( .77 ) Self-Status – – 1.64** ( .75 ) Constant 4.2**** ( .39 ) .90 ( 1.67 ) 18.68 **** ( 3.67 ) R2 = .21 F ( 3 , 91 ) = 8.14 p < .001 R2 = .25 F ( 4 , 90 ) = 14.28 p < .001 R2 = .09 F ( 5 , 89 ) = 1.83 p = .11 Notes : Coefficients are unstandardized and presented with standard errors in parenthesis *p < .1 , **p < .05 .
*** p < .01 , **** p < .001 Notes : Coefficients Orange vs. Gold are unstandardize Restauran status d. p < .1 , ** p < .05 , *** p < .01 , **** p < .001 t Self-status Tip Fig .
5 The effects of color ( gold vs. orange ) on bill folder on tipping through restaurant status and self-status ( Study 4 ) 330 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 dence for our theorization related to status inducement of the color gold and its effects on tipping amount .
General discussion The results of this research enhance our understanding of how the color of service props influences consumers ’ tipping behavior .
Consistent with the referential meaning of color , we found that activation of the gold–status association enhanced consumers ’ subsequent status per- ception and enhanced tipping behavior .
Study 1 , a field experiment , showed that restaurant customers who en- countered a gold-colored ( vs. black-colored ) service prop ( i.e. , bill folder ) left larger tips .
Study 2 enhanced the robustness of this finding by generalizing the effects of the color gold by using a different service prop— tablecloth .
We delved into the underlying processes in Studies 3–5 .
Study 3 revealed that customers increased their tip amounts ( % ) through enhancement of restaurant status and self-status perception ( in that sequence ) when they encountered a gold-colored ( vs. black-colored ) ser- vice prop .
In Study 4 , we provided further process ev- idence by ruling out novelty as a potential alternative mechanism that drives this effect of the color gold .
In Study 5 , we provided direct process evidence by show- ing that status priming weakens the effects observed in our earlier studies .
Theoretical contribution Our research makes theoretical contributions to several literature streams in marketing .
Most importantly , our findings enrich color marketing literature by identifying the ways in which the color gold influences consumers ’ tipping behaviors .
Unlike most previous studies in the color domain , which use the arousal-evaluation frame- work to identify a process mechanism , we employed the referential meaning framework and revealed a col- or–meaning association ( i.e. , status perception ) as our key underlying process through which the color gold influences tipping .
The results of our studies consis- tently show that the color gold influences tipping be- havior positively through status perception .
These re- sults somewhat contradict previous research findings , which showed consistent patterns of less favorable con- sumer outcomes with warm ( vs. cool ) colors .
Our re- sults demonstrated the positive effects of gold , which is likely to be considered as a relatively warmer color based on the wavelength of the color hue .
Gold is considered a tertiary color represented by a blend of yellow-orange , both of which appear to be closer to warmer colors .
By considering the meaning of color to consumers , we can explain why the color gold gen- erates positive consumer outcomes .
Moreover , our fo- cus on the gold color is novel because prior research has focused predominantly on the effects of the colors red and blue .
Future research needs to pay greater at- tention to colors and their learned color–meaning asso- ciations instead of focusing only on color typologies based on the primary/secondary or the warm/cold dimension .
Our study also contributes to the service atmospher- ics literature .
We investigated the effects of color on tipping behavior by using service props .
Although other factors in service settings , such as artifacts , color , and ambient condition , have been recognized as important elements that affect customers ’ behavior and attitude toward a service-providing organization ( Berry et al .
2006 ; Bitner 1992 ; Bolton et al .
2014 ) , there is little empirical support for this .
We find that the color of service props ( e.g. , bill folders and tablecloths ) influ- ences consumers ’ perceptions of restaurant status , which eventually increases consumers ’ tipping .
Thus , our study results provide empirical support for the importance of service props as a marketing tool that can enhance con- sumer spending and help create positive perceptions about a service-providing organization .
Third , we contribute to tipping literature by identi- fying a new predictor of tipping , namely , the status perception induced by color .
Extant tipping literature has identified the predictors of tipping from the service encounter perspective ( server gender , server looks , server behavior , or service quality ) ( Hubbard et al .
2003 ; Lynn and McCall 2000 ; May 1980 ; Rind and 0.00 % 5.00 % 10.00 % 15.00 % 20.00 % 25.00 % 21.66 % 2 PRIM 0.44 % ED 21.92 % NON-PR 17.66 % IMED GOLD BLACK Fig .
6 Tip ( % ) when status is primed vs. non-primed ( Study 5 ) J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 331 Bordia 1996 ; Stephen and Zweigenhaft 1986 ) or in relation to the factors that affect individual customers ’ emotional states , and weather conditions ( Cunningham 1979 ; Rind and Bordia 1996 ; Seiter 2007 ) .
Although a few studies have proposed that tipping can be related to individuals ’ motivation for status display ( Lynn 1997 ; Shamir 1984 ) , no study had tested the status perception induced by color as a construct that relates to tipping .
To the best of our knowledge , our study is the first to test status perception induced by color as an underlying mechanism that influences tipping behavior positively .
Managerial implications This research also has several important managerial im- plications ; Table 4 summarizes the key findings and implications .
Our findings could provide insights for marketing managers in service industries , where tipping is an important source of revenue .
For example , man- agers might be able to increase tipping revenue by in- corporating factors that trigger status perception in the design of service environments .
More specifically , res- taurant managers might use marks of social status in their restaurant menu designs , such as symbols or pic- tures that signify status .
The results of our study suggest that use of the color gold could increase tipping rates by significant levels .
Extrapolating a two-percentage- point increase in tip amounts , as was observed in many of our studies , to the whole restaurant industry adds up to a very high increase in total amount of tips .
Specifically , based on the estimated tips in US restau- rants , which stood at about $ 27 billion , a two percentage point increase from the current average tip of 15 % ( Azar 2007a ; May 1980 ) translates to more than a 13 % ( i.e. , 2/15 ) increase in the level of change , resulting in $ 3.5 billion ( i.e. , 27 billion X .13 ) of addi- tional tipping revenues .
Moreover , given the general downward trend in the tipping rate and the fact that most wait staff rely on tipping for a living wage , espe- cially given the $ 2.13 federal minimum wage for tipped wait staff ( Sheridan 2014 ) , the findings of our research have important implications for the economy and the overall well-being of restaurant employees .
In other words , given that many restaurant employees mostly earn from tips , this can potentially lead to significant changes in the earnings potential of a large number of people .
Beyond restaurants , at a more general level , our findings could provide insights on service design to marketing managers .
For example , the use of status symbols when providing service in a hotel or casino might increase consumer spending on the service be- yond tips .
Companies should examine ways to increase status perception through salutations ( e.g. , hello Mr./ Mrs./Dr .
) , packaging ( Ampuero and Vila 2006 ) , brand prominence ( Han et al .
2010 ) , and signage , just to name a few examples .
However , as suggested by Study 5 , there might be ceiling effects on tipping and voluntary payment with increased status primes and perceptions .
Our findings inform marketing managers that color can make seemingly meaningless objects nuanced ( Rawsthorn 2010 ) and influence customers ’ perceptions and behaviors , such that managers need to choose the color of small details such as service props with the Table 4 Summary of key findings and managerial implications of color in marketing Key findings Managerial implications Colors instill meaning in service props that contribute to the formation of consumers ’ perceptions about service providers .
Marketing managers must pay attention to the meanings of color and the details of service design , even in seemingly meaningless objects , since they come into play in creating perceptions about service providers .
Colors of service props in service atmospherics influence customers ’ tipping behaviors .
Marketing efforts extended to the strategic use of color in service environments can increase tipping revenue , which could have a positive influence on server ’ s service delivery .
Status perception is the key mechanism through which the color gold influences customers ’ tipping behavior .
Marketing managers should try to increase factors that trigger status perceptions in the design of the service environment—using the color gold is one way .
Status perceptions might be triggered in other service elements , beyond gold service props , such as signage , interactions with employees , etc .
Status perception triggers might be beneficial for other payment behaviors beyond tipping , such as open pricing systems .
332 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 overall marketing strategy in mind .
Marketing managers and even designers tend to regard color simply as a part of decoration , particularly when it is not incorporated with the brand ( Rawsthorn 2010 ) .
In contrast , our find- ings suggest that color can imbue meanings that influ- ence customers ’ spending and likely their repeat patron- age .
For example , crisp white beddings in the Westin hotel chain convey to customers that the beds are clean and contribute to the distinctive experience at the hotel ( Berry et al .
2006 ) .
This positive experience from the referential meaning of white in hotels ( i.e. , cleanliness ) has influenced consumers to buy the bedding for their home , as well as turned Westin guests into repeat cus- tomers ( Schoenberger 2004 ) .
Finally , our findings have important implications for businesses that employ an open pricing system , such as auctions and pay-what-you-want ( PWYW ) pricing , where consumers decide the price .
PWYW pricing strat- egies are seen in online bidding ( e.g. , eBay ) , taxis ( e.g. , Cocoa Beach Taxi , Inc. ) , and game sellers ( e.g. , IndieGameStand ) .
Even Panera Bread tried ( albeit failed ) this pricing strategy for their chili ( Kim 2013 ) .
Our results suggest that marketing managers need to trigger status perceptions in an open pricing system to increase payment amounts , and a Bgolden^ atmospheric effect is one way to that end .
Limitations and future research directions Our research mainly focused on the effects of the status- laden color gold on tipping and its underlying mecha- nism ; however , there could be several relevant modera- tors that require follow-up examinations .
Individual ’ s in- come level or disposable income might moderate the effects of the color gold given their potential influence on spending in general .
Individual differences such as the desire for status or need for uniqueness might mod- erate the gold effect observed in this study .
For example , the gold effect might be magnified for individuals who are concerned about their social status or have a strong desire for status .
Although extant literature supports the notion that gold is widely used as a symbol of status ( Drèze and Nunes 2009 ) , some individuals might have stronger associations between gold and status , while others may have weaker perceived associations .
Future work should examine how varying strengths of associa- tions of the color gold with status perception might affect tipping .
In relation to potential moderators , restaurant type needs to be examined as well .
We conducted our field experiment at a casual dining restaurant and the scenarios in our non-field experiments were also in the context of relatively moderate-priced meals .
The effects of the color gold could vary depending on restaurant type .
It is possible that atmospherics related to light or music , such as those at higher-end restaurants , could in- fluence our observed effects .
We investigated only one effect at a time ( bill folder or tablecloth ) and there is scope for examining the effects of multiple service props simultaneously .
Although we examined the effects of hue ( gold , black , and orange ) , we did not examine potential effects of color value and chroma ( Gorn et al .
1997 ) .
Future research should exam- ine the potential effects of color value and chroma on tipping behavior .
This could be especially interesting since there might be scope for altering chroma and value while keeping hue constant , perhaps to match certain color–meaning associ- ations .
Other colors that might symbolize status , such as silver or bronze , could also be examined .
Our study focused on tipping in a restaurant context .
Future studies need to empirically test the robustness of the gold effect in a different tipping context .
It would be helpful for business managers to investigate the gold effect in other service contexts such as hair salons , valet parking , or hotels with bellhop service .
Given that tips from consumers represent a significant source of income for service providers across various industries ( Lynn et al .
1993 ) , applying these findings to other tipping contexts beyond restaurants could be crucial for design- ing service encounters and service environments to pos- itively influence employee performance and productivi- ty .
Moreover , it might be meaningful to examine the effects of the color gold on other outcome variables such as overall perceived experience and brand image perceptions .
Although our study provides support for the use of gold-colored service props to increase tipping revenue , we did not examine the effect of an increase in tipping from the consumer ’ s perspective .
It is conceivable that an increase in tipping from their perspective might have a negative influence on their patronization if consumers perceive that the dining experience is more expensive with the increased tip amount .
On the other hand , en- hanced status perception might offset this negative im- pact as well .
Future research is needed to explore these issues to enhance our understanding of a golden atmo- spheric effect .
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Lauren Beitelspacher , Anne Roggeveen , and Stacey Robinson for their sugges- tions on Study 2 .
J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 333 Appendix Table 5 Descriptive statistics and measurement reliability Study 3 Study 4 Study 5 Scale M ( SD ) α M ( SD ) α M ( SD ) α Restaurant Status ( Adapted from Drèze and Nunes 2009 ) a This restaurant is special This restaurant has a high degree of status I feel this restaurant has more status relative to other restaurants .
The restaurant seems upscale 4.55 4.67 4.43 ( 1.00 ) ( 1.14 ) ( 1.14 ) .70 r = .54 4.40 4.40 4.42 4.28 4.48 ( 1.10 ) ( 1.15 ) ( 1.25 ) ( 1.23 ) ( 1.30 ) .91 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Self- status ( Adapted from Drèze and Nunes 2009 ) I feel special in this restaurant I have attained a high degree of status in this restaurant I have more status in this restaurant relative to other customers 4.00 4.57 4.01 3.43 ( .97 ) ( 1.18 ) ( 1.31 ) ( 1.32 ) .63 3.48 4.06 3.49 2.89 ( 1.06 ) ( 1.19 ) ( 1.41 ) ( 1.23 ) .77 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Novelty ( Cox and Cox 2002 ) The bill folder is new The bill folder is unusual The bill folder is novel The bill folder is atypical n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 4.68 4.72 4.37 4.56 5.11 ( 1.17 ) ( 1.46 ) ( 1.48 ) ( 1.31 ) ( 1.47 ) .84 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Mood ( Adapted from Allen and Janiszewski 1989 ) At this moment I am feeling good At this moment I am feeling pleasant At this moment I am happy At this moment I am feeling positive 5.57 5.62 5.59 5.51 5.56 ( .93 ) ( .90 ) ( .99 ) ( 1.05 ) ( 1.09 ) .94 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Involvement ( Adapted from Bower and Landreth 2001 ) .
Tipping at a restaurant is important .
Tipping at a restaurant is of concern to me .
Tipping at a restaurant is relevant .
Tipping in a restaurant matters to me .
6.06 6.33 5.70 6.11 6.03 ( .99 ) ( .90 ) ( 1.25 ) ( 1.02 ) ( 1.21 ) .92 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Attractiveness ( Adapted from Biswas et al .
2014b ) The bill folder looks very good in terms of visual appearance The bill folder is very attractive 5.36 5.38 5.35 ( 1.10 ) ( 1.07 ) ( 1.12 ) .93 r = .87 5.21 5.46 4.96 ( 1.24 ) ( 1.20 ) ( 1.45 ) .85 r = .76 Table 6 Summary of CFA results for key constructs in Studies 3 and 4 Scale CFA loadings Composite reliability Average variance extracted Study 3 Study 4 Study3 Study 4 Study3 Study 4 Restaurant Status ( Adapted from Drèze and Nunes 2009 ) a 0.68–0.80 0.75–0.93 0.71 0.91 0.55 0.73 Self-status ( Adapted from Drèze and Nunes 2009 ) 0.38–0.68 0.60–1.00 0.65 0.81 0.47 0.60 Mood ( Adapted from Allen and Janiszewski 1989 ) 0.84–0.94 n/a 0.94 n/a 0.80 n/a Involvement ( Adapted from Bower and Landreth 2001 ) .
0.80–0.95 n/a 0.92 n/a 0.75 n/a 334 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 References Abril , P. S. , Olazábal , A. M. , & Cava , A .
( 2009 ) .
Marketing and the law .
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 37 ( 3 ) , 375–377 .
Allen , R. L. ( 2009 ) .
Fine food is not just for white- tablecloth restaurants anymore .
Nation ’ s Restaurant News , 43 ( 43 ) , 21 .
Allen , C. T. , & Janiszewski , C. A .
( 1989 ) .
Assessing the role of contin- gency awareness in attitudinal conditioning with implications for advertising research .
Journal of Marketing Research , 26 ( 1 ) , 30–43 .
Ampuero , O. , & Vila , N. ( 2006 ) .
Consumer perceptions of product pack- aging .
Journal of Consumer Marketing , 23 ( 2 ) , 100–112 .
Anderson , C. , Hildreth , J .
A. D. , & Howland , L. ( 2015 ) .
Is the desire for status a fundamental human motive ?
A review of the empirical literature .
Psychological Bulletin , 141 ( 3 ) , 574–601 .
Azar , O. H. ( 2004 ) .
The history of tipping - from sixteenth-centruy England to United States in the 1910s .
The Journal of Socio- Economics , 33 ( 6 ) , 745–764 .
Azar , O. H. ( 2007a ) .Why pay extra ?
Tipping and the importance of social norms and feelings in economic theory .
Journal of Socio- Economics , 36 ( 2 ) , 250–265 .
Azar , O. H. ( 2007b ) .
The social norm of tipping : a review .
Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 37 ( 2 ) , 380–402 .
Babin , B. J. , Hardesty , D. M. , & Suter , T. A .
( 2003 ) .
Color and shopping intentions : the intervening effect of price fairness and perceived affect .
Journal of Business Research , 56 ( 7 ) , 541–551 .
Bagchi , R. , & Cheema , A .
( 2013 ) .
The effect of red background color on willingness-to-pay : the moderating role of selling mechanism .
Journal of Consumer Research , 39 ( 5 ) , 947–960 .
Baker , J. , & Cameron , M. ( 1996 ) .
The effects of the service environment on affect and consumer perception of waiting time : an analysis of an industrial technology diffusion .
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 24 ( 4 ) , 338–349 .
Baker , J. , Grewal , D. , & Parasuraman , A .
( 1994 ) .
The influence of store environment on quality inferences and store image .
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 22 ( 4 ) , 328–339 .
Barry , K. ( 2015 ) .
Sick of stainless ?
GE fridges get a kick of color .
Retrieved March 19 , from http : //refrigerators.reviewed .
com/news/colorful-fridges-might-come-to-a-retailer-near-you .
Belk , R. W. ( 1988 ) .
Possessions and the extended self .
Journal of Consumer Research , 15 ( 2 ) , 139–168 .
Bellizzi , J .
A. , & Hite , R. E. ( 1992 ) .
Environmental color , consumer feelings , and purchase likelihood .
Psychology and Marketing , 9 ( 5 ) , 347–363 .
Bellizzi , J .
A. , Crowley , A. E. , & Hasty , R.W .
( 1983 ) .
The effects of color in store design .
Journal of Retailing , 59 ( 1 ) , 21–45 .
Berry , L. L. , Wall , E. A. , & Carbone , L. P. ( 2006 ) .
Service clues and customer assessment of the service experience : lessons from Marketing .
Academy of Management Perspectives , 20 ( May ) , 43– 57 .
Biswas , D. , Labrecque , L. , Markos , E. , & Lehmann , D. R. ( 2014a ) .
Making choices while smelling , tasting , and listening : the role of sensory ( Dis ) similarity when sequentially sampling products .
Journal of Marketing , 78 ( 1 ) , 112–126 .
Biswas , D. , Szocs , C. , Krishna , A. , & Lehmann , D. R. ( 2014b ) .
Something to chew on : the effects of oral haptics on mastication , orosensory perception , and calorie estimation .
Journal of Consumer Research , 41 ( 2 ) , 261–273 .
Biswas , D. , Szocs , C. , Wansink , B. , & Chacko , R. ( 2017 ) .
Shining light on atmospherics : how ambient light influences food choices .
Journal of Marketing Research , forthcoming .
Bitner , M .
J .
( 1990 ) .
Evaluating service encounters : the effects of physical surroundings and employee responses .
Journal of Marketing , 54 ( April ) , 69–82 .
Bitner , M. J .
( 1992 ) .
Servicescapes : the impact of physical surroundings on customers and employees .
Journal of Marketing , 56 ( 2 ) , 57–71 .
Block , L. , & Kramer , T. ( 2009 ) .
The effect of superstitious beliefs on performance expectations .
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 37 ( 2 ) , 161–169 .
Bolton , R. N. , Gustafsson , A. , Nancy , J. M. , & David , J. S. ( 2014 ) .
Small details that make big differences as a firm ’ s differentiating strategy .
Journal of Service Management , 25 ( 2 ) , 253–274 .
Table 7 Correlations between variables in the hypotheses for Studies 3 and 4 Study 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 .
Color Study3 ( black vs. gold ) Study4 ( orange vs. gold ) 1 1 2 .
Restaurant Status Study3 ( black vs. gold ) Study4 ( orange vs. gold ) .20 * .35** 1 3 .
Self-status Study3 ( black vs. gold ) Study4 ( orange vs. gold ) .15 .18 .49** .61** 1 4 .
Tipping ( % ) Study3 ( black vs. gold ) Study4 ( orange vs. gold ) .27* .18 .01 .07 .21 .22* 1 5 .
Involvement Study3 ( black vs. gold ) Study4 ( orange vs. gold ) .05 n/a .04 n/a .08 n/a .12 n/a 1 6 .
Mood Study3 ( black vs. gold ) Study4 ( orange vs. gold ) .16 n/a .49** n/a .34** n/a .19 n/a .33** n/a 1 * Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level ( 2-tailed ) ** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level ( 2-tailed ) J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 335 Bower , A .
B. , & Landreth , S. ( 2001 ) .
Is beauty best ?
highly versus nor- mally attractive models in advertising .
Journal of Advertising , 30 ( 1 ) , 1–12 .
Conlin , M. , Lynn , M. , & O ’ Donoghue , T. ( 2003 ) .
The norm of restaurant tipping .
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 52 ( 3 ) , 297– 321 .
Cox , D. S. , & Cox , A. D. ( 2002 ) .
Beyond first impressions : the effects of repeated exposure on consumer liking of visually complex and sim- ple product designs .
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 30 ( 2 ) , 119–130 .
Crowley , A. E. ( 1993 ) .
The two-dimensional impact of color on shop- ping .
Marketing Letters , 4 ( 1 ) , 59–69 .
Cunningham , M. R. ( 1979 ) .
Weather , mood , and helping behavior : quasi experiments with the sunshine samaritan .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 ( 11 ) , 1947–1956 .
Drèze , X. , & Nunes , J. C. ( 2009 ) .
Feeling Superior : the impact of loyalty program structure on consumers ’ perceptions of status .
Journal of Consumer Research , 35 ( 6 ) , 890–905 .
Dubois , D. , Rucker , D. D. , & Galinsky , A. D. ( 2012 ) .
Super size me : product size as a signal of status .
Journal of Consumer Research , 38 ( 6 ) , 1047–1062 .
Elliot , A. J. , & Maier , M. A .
( 2014 ) .
Color psychology : effects of per- ceiving color on psychological functioning in humans .
Annual Review of Psychology , 65 , 95–120 .
Elliot , A. J. , Maier , M. A. , Moller , A. C. , Friedman , R. , & Meinhardt , J .
( 2007 ) .
Color and psychological functioning : the effect of red on performance attainment .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 136 ( 1 ) , 154–168 .
Emerson , M. R. ( 1962 ) .
Power-dependence relations .
American Sociological Review , 27 ( 1 ) , 31–41 .
Fisk , R. P. , Grove , S. J. , & John , J .
( 2008 ) .
Interactive services marketing .
Boston : Houghton Mifflin .
Fiske , S. T. ( 1993 ) .
Controlling other people : the impact of power on stereotyping .
American Psychologist , 48 ( 6 ) , 621–628 .
Geboy , L. D. ( 1996 ) .
Color makes a better message .
Marketing Tools , 16 ( 2 ) , 52–55 .
Gorn , G. J. , Chattopadhyay , A. , Yi , T. , & Dahl , D. W. ( 1997 ) .
Effects of color as an executional cue in advertising : they ’ re in the shade .
Management Science , 43 ( 10 ) , 1387–1400 .
Gorn , G. J. , Chattopadhyay , A. , & Sengupta , J .
( 2004 ) .
Waiting for the web : how screen color affects time perception .
Journal of Marketing Research , 41 ( 2 ) , 215–225 .
Guéguen , N. ( 2012 ) .
Hair color and wages : waitresses with blond hair have more fun .
Journal of Socio-Economics , 41 ( 4 ) , 370–372 .
Guéguen , N. , & Jacob , C. ( 2012 ) .
Lipstick and tipping behavior : when red lipstick enhance waitresses tips .
International Journal of Hospitality Management , 31 ( 4 ) , 1333–1335 .
Guéguen , N. , & Jacob , C. ( 2014 ) .
Clothing color and tipping : gentlemen patrons give more tips to waitress with red clothes .
Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Research , 38 ( 2 ) , 275–280 .
Haeckel , S. H. , Carbone , L. P. , & Berry , L. L. ( 2003 ) .
How to lead the customer experience.Marketing Management , 12 ( January ) , 18–23 .
Han , Y. J. , Nunes , J. C. , & Drèze , X .
( 2010 ) .
Signaling status with luxury goods : the role of brand prominence .
Journal of Marketing , 74 ( 4 ) , 15–30 .
Hayes , A. F. ( 2013 ) .
Introduction to mediation , moderation , and condi- tional process analysis : A regression-based approach .
New York : Guilford Press .
Hemphill , M. ( 1996 ) .
A note on adults ’ color-emotion associations .
Journal of Genetic Psychology , 157 ( 3 ) , 275–80 .
Henderson , C. M. , Beck , J. T. , & Palmatier , R. W. ( 2011 ) .
Review of the theoretical underpinnings of loyalty programs .
Journal of Consumer Psychology , 21 ( 3 ) , 256–276 .
Heung , V. C. S. , & Gu , T. ( 2012 ) .
Influence of restaurant atmospherics on patron satisfaction and behavioral intentions .
International Journal of Hospitality Management , 31 ( 4 ) , 1167–1177 .
Hubbard , A. S. , Tsuji , A .
A. , Williams , C. , & Seatriz , V. J .
( 2003 ) .
Effects of touch on gratuities received in same-gender and cross-gender dyads .
Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 33 ( 11 ) , 2427–2438 .
Jacob , C. , Guéguen , N. , Gaëlle , B. , & Ardiccioni , R. ( 2010 ) .
Waitresses ’ facial cosmetics and tipping : a field experiment .
International Journal of Hospitality Management , 29 ( 1 ) , 188–190 .
Kaltcheva , V. D. , & Weitz , B .
A .
( 2006 ) .
When should a retailer create an exciting store environment ?
Journal of Marketing , 70 ( 1 ) , 107–118 .
Kay , P. , & Regier , T. ( 2003 ) .
Resolving the question of color naming universals .
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 100 ( 15 ) , 9085–9089 .
Kim , S. ( 2013 ) .
Panera Bread pulls 'pay-what-you-want ' chili .
Retrieved August 22 , 2015 from http : //abcnews.go.com/Business/panera- pulls-pay-chili/story ? id=19629087 .
Kwortnik , R. J. , Jr. , Lynn , M. , & Ross , W. T. , Jr. ( 2009 ) .
Buyer monitor- ing : a means to insure personalized service buyer monitoring .
Journal of Marketing , 46 ( 5 ) , 573–583 .
Labrecque , L. I. , & Milne , G. R. ( 2012 ) .
Exciting red and competent blue : the importance of color in marketing .
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 40 ( 5 ) , 711–727 .
Labrecque , L. I. , Patrick , V. M. , & Milne , G. R. ( 2013 ) .
The marketers ’ prismatic palette : a review of color research and future directions .
Psychology & Marketing , 30 ( 6 ) , 461–469 .
Lohse , G. L. , & Rosen , D. L. ( 2001 ) .
Signaling quality and credibility in directional advertising : the influence of color and graphics on choice .
Journal of Advertising , 30 ( 2 ) , 73–85 .
Lynn , M. ( 1997 ) .
Tipping customs and status seeking : a cross-country study .
International Journal of Hospitality Management , 16 ( 2 ) , 221–224 .
Lynn , M. , & Grassman , A .
( 1990 ) .
Restaurant tipping : an examination of three rational explanations .
Journal of Economic Psychology , 11 ( 2 ) , 169–181 .
Lynn , M. , & Latane , B .
( 1984 ) .
The psychology of restaurant tipping .
Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 14 ( 6 ) , 549–561 .
Lynn , M. , & McCall , M. ( 2000 ) .
Gratitude and gratuity : a meta-analysis of research on the service-tipping relationship .
Journal of Socio- Economics , 29 ( 2 ) , 203–214 .
Lynn , M. , & Sturman , M. ( 2003 ) .
It ’ s simpler than it seems .
International Journal of Hospitality Management , 22 ( 1 ) , 103–110 .
Lynn , M. , Zinkhan , G. M. , & Harris , J .
( 1993 ) .
Consumer Tipping : a cross-country study .
Journal of Consumer Research , 20 ( 3 ) , 478– 488 .
Lynn , M. , Giebelhausen , M. , Garcia , S. , Li , Y. , & Patumanon , I .
( 2016 ) .
Clothing color and tipping : an attempted replication and extension .
Journal of Hospitality , 40 ( 4 ) , 516–524 .
Madden , T. J. , Hewett , K. , & Roth , M. S. ( 2000 ) .
Managingimages in different cultures : a cross-national study of color meanings andpreferences .
Journal of International Marketing , 8 ( 4 ) , 90–107 .
Madzharov , A. V. , Block , L. G. , & Morrin , M. ( 2015 ) .
The cool scent of power : effects of ambient scent on consumer preferences and choice behavior .
Journal of Marketing , 79 ( January ) , 83–96 .
Magee , J. C. , & Galinsky , A. D. ( 2008 ) .
8 Social hierarchy : the self- reinforcing nature of power and status .
Academy of Management Annals 2 ( 1 ) , 351–398 .
8 Mandel , N. , & Johnson , E. J .
( 2002 ) .
When web pages influence choice : effects of visual primes on experts and novices .
Journal of Consumer Research , 29 ( 2 ) , 235–245 .
May , J. M. ( 1980 ) .
Looking for tips : an empirical perspective on restau- rant tipping .
Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly , 20 ( 4 ) , 6–8 .
Meyers-Levy , J. , & Zhu , R. ( .
J . ) .
( 2010 ) .
Gender differences in the mean- ings consumers infer frommusic and other aesthetic stimuli .
Journal of Consumer Psychology , 20 , 495–507 .
Rawsthorn , A .
( 2010 ) .
Daring to play with a rich palette .
Retrieved July 20 , 2016 from http : //www.nytimes.com/2010/01/18/arts/18 iht-design18.html ? _r=0 .
336 J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 Rind , B. , & Bordia , P. ( 1996 ) .
Effect on restaurant tipping of male and female servers drawing a happy , smiling face on the backs of cus- tomers ’ checks .
Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 26 ( 3 ) , 218– 225 .
Rucker , D. D. , Dubois , D. , & Galinsky , A. D. ( 2011 ) .
Generous paupers and stingy princes : power drives consumerspending on self versus others .
Journal of Consumer Research , 37 ( 6 ) , 1015–1029 .
Schoenberger , C.R. , ( 2004 ) .
Room for rent or sale .
Retrieved July 20 , 2016 from http : //www.forbes.com/forbes/2004/0607/124.html .
Seiter , J. S. ( 2007 ) .
Ingratiation and gratuity : the effect of complimenting customers on tipping behavior in restaurants .
Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 37 ( 3 ) , 478–485 .
Shamir , B .
( 1984 ) .
Between gratitude and gratuity : an anlysis of tipping .
Annals of Tourism Research , 11 ( 1 ) , 59–78 .
Sheridan , P. ( 2014 ) .
Living on $ 2.13 and hour , plus tips .
CNN Money .
Retrieved Oct. 31 , 2015 from http : //money.cnn.com/2014/05/05 /news/economy/tipped-worker-minimum-wage/ .
Singh , S. ( 2006 ) .
Impact of color on marketing .
Management Decision , 44 ( 6 ) , 783–789 .
Stephen , R. , & Zweigenhaft , R. L. ( 1986 ) .
The effect on tipping of a waitress touching male and female .
The Journal of Social Psychology , 126 ( 1 ) , 141–142 .
Strange , A .
( 2015 ) .
Why apple is obsessed with gold : It ’ s all about Asia .
Marshable .
Retrieved March 28 , 2016 from http : //mashable .
com/2015/04/25/why-apple-loves-gold/ # 1otsB7lhNsqQ .
Vohs , K. D. ( 2006 ) .
The psychological consequences of money .
Science , 314 ( 5802 ) , 1154–1156 .
Vohs , K. D. , Mead , N. L. , & Goode , M. R. ( 2008 ) .
Merely activating the concept of money changes personal and interpersonal behavior .
Current Directions in Psychological Science , 17 ( 3 ) , 208–212 .
Whitfield , T. W. , & Wiltshire , T. J .
( 1990 ) .
Color psychology : a critical review .
Genetic , Social , and General Psychology Monographs , 116 ( 4 ) , 385–411 .
Zeithaml , V. A .
( 1988 ) .
Consumer perceptions of price , quality , and val- ue .
Journal of Marketing , 52 ( July ) , 2–22 .
Zeltner , P. M. ( 1975 ) .
John Dewey ’ s aesthetic philosophy ( vol .
12 ) .
Amsterdam : B. R. Grüner .
Zhao , X. , Lynch , J. G. , Jr. , & Chen , Q .
( 2010 ) .
Reconsidering Baron and Kenny : myths and truths about mediation analysis .
Journal of Consumer Research , 37 ( 2 ) , 197–206 .
Zhu , R. , & Meyers-Levy , J .
( 2005 ) .
Distinguishing between the meanings of music : when background music affects product perceptions .
Journal of Marketing Research , 42 ( 3 ) , 333–345 .
J. of the Acad .
Mark .
Sci .
( 2018 ) 46:317–337 337 Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science is a copyright of Springer , 2018 .
All Rights Reserved .
