Lindsey_JournAppPsych_2017_qNvQ.pdf
aTmpg4imXNzuiZmhBZyALPyip_bW-Lindsey_JournAppPsych_2017_qNvQ.pdf.plain.html

Investigating Why and for Whom Management Ethnic Representativeness Influences Interpersonal Mistreatment in the Workplace Alex P. Lindsey Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis Derek R. Avery Wake Forest University Jeremy F. Dawson University of Sheffield Eden B .
King George Mason University Preliminary research suggests that employees use the demographic makeup of their organization to make sense of diversity-related incidents at work .
The authors build on this work by examining the impact of management ethnic representativeness—the degree to which the ethnic composition of managers in an organization mirrors or is misaligned with the ethnic composition of employees in that organization .
To do so , they integrate signaling theory and a sense-making perspective into a relational demography framework to investigate why and for whom management ethnic representativeness may have an impact on interpersonal mistreatment at work .
Specifically , in three complementary studies , the authors examine the relationship between management ethnic representativeness and interpersonal mistreatment .
First , they analyze the relationship between management ethnic representativeness and perceptions of harass- ment , bullying , and abuse the next year , as moderated by individuals ’ ethnic similarity to others in their organizations in a sample of 60,602 employees of Britain ’ s National Health Service .
Second , a con- structive replication investigates perceived behavioral integrity as an explanatory mechanism that can account for the effects of representativeness using data from a nationally representative survey of working adults in the United States .
Third and finally , online survey data collected at two time points replicated these patterns and further integrated the effects of representativeness and dissimilarity when they are measured using both objective and subjective strategies .
Results support the authors ’ proposed moderated mediation model in which management ethnic representation is negatively related to inter- personal mistreatment through the mediator of perceived behavioral integrity , with effects being stronger for ethnically dissimilar employees .
Keywords : discrimination , mistreatment , signaling theory , relational demography , representativeness The demographic characteristics of organizations can shape the way people experience and understand diversity in the workplace .
Indeed , when an executive board is diverse , organizational outsid- ers use this information to infer that diversity is genuinely valued by the organization , which can in turn affect the organization ’ s reputation for fairness and innovative performance ( Miller & del Carmen Triana , 2009 ) .
Preliminary research also suggests that employees use the demographic makeup of their organization to make sense of diversity-related incidents at work ( Roberson & Stevens , 2006 ) .
Moreover , emerging evidence suggests that work- force diversity can signal to employees that the organization values diversity , but the nature of this relationship depends on the diver- sity of the community in which the organization is embedded ( Pugh , Dietz , Brief , & Wiley , 2008 ) .
Equally important , yet pre- viously unexplored , may be the ethnic composition of organiza- tional leaders relative to the employees they manage .
Here we examine the impact of management ethnic representativeness— the degree to which the ethnic composition of managers in an organization mirrors or is misaligned with the ethnic composition of employees in that organization .
To do so , we integrate signaling theory and a sense-making perspective into a relational demogra- phy framework ( Tsui & O ’ Reilly , 1989 ) to investigate why and for whom management ethnic representativeness may have an impact on interpersonal mistreatment at work .
This research identifies meaningful negative consequences of demographic misalignments between the composition of managers and their subordinates .
Prior scholarship demonstrates that orga- nizational demography can shape employees ’ workplace experi- ences ; we know that demographic composition matters ( e.g. , Avery , McKay , & Wilson , 2008 ) .
Previous studies also show that This article was published Online First June 15 , 2017 .
Alex P. Lindsey , Department of Psychology , Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis ; Derek R. Avery , School of Business , Wake Forest University ; Jeremy F. Dawson , School of Health and Related Research , University of Sheffield ; Eden B .
King , Department of Psychology , George Mason University .
An earlier version of this article was presented at the 2016 annual conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology in Anaheim , CA .
The last 3 authors contributed equally , and thus only their authorship order was determined alphabetically .
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Alex P. Lindsey , Department of Psychology , Indiana University–Purdue Univer- sity Indianapolis , LD 124 , 402 N. Blackford Street , Indianapolis , IN 46202-3275 .
E-mail : aplindse @ iupui.edu T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
Journal of Applied Psychology © 2017 American Psychological Association 2017 , Vol .
102 , No .
11 , 1545–1563 0021-9010/17/ $ 12.00 http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/apl0000238 1545 the demographic profile of organizational leaders sends a signal to prospective employees about the organization ( e.g. , Miller & del Carmen Triana , 2009 ) .
What we did not yet know , prior to the current research , is whether the alignment between the demogra- phy of the organization and the demography of leaders also mat- ters , and if so , for whom , why , and to what effect ?
Indeed , the previously unexplored problem here is that the demographic char- acteristics of managers do not always match the characteristics of employees .
This is a timely focus because demographic diversity is increasing among workers at a higher rate than it is among managers and an important focus because differences can give rise to challenges .
Here , we directly examine the impact of manage- ment ethnic representativeness to provide robust answers to the aforementioned research questions .
In so doing , this research will build understanding of the implications of demographic misalign- ments across organizational levels .
Thus , the current work shapes and extends scholarly discourse in several meaningful ways .
First , at the broadest level , we uniquely synthesize signaling and relational demography theories with a sense-making perspective .
Our consideration of manage- ment representativeness is an important departure from traditional views of relational demography , which largely focus on the social identity processes ( e.g. , similarity-attraction ) that arise when ( a ) supervisor–subordinate pairs or ( b ) an employee and his or her colleagues share demographic characteristics ( e.g. , Avery et al. , 2008 ) .
Instead , we radically shift focus to the distinct phenomenon of signaling , the psychological process of inferring unknown in- formation from visible cues .
Second , although signaling theory is typically used to explain how organizational outsiders react to organizational signals ( see Connelly , Certo , Ireland , & Reutzel , 2011 ) , this article represents one of the first integrations of sig- naling theory , a sense-making perspective , and relational demog- raphy to explain why and for whom a signal from an organization ( i.e. , management ethnic representativeness ) may have an impact on individuals already working within that organization .
By fo- cusing on incumbent employees as interpreters of signals , we show that the utility of signaling theory extends beyond external stake- holders and also can explain phenomena occurring within an organization .
Third , by triangulating across samples and using multiple measurement strategies , we provide robust evidence re- garding why ( via the explanatory mechanism of perceived behav- ioral integrity ) and for whom ( via the exacerbating effects of ethnic dissimilarity ) management ethnic representativeness has an effect on experiences of interpersonal mistreatment in the work- place .
This contribution should not be overlooked , as the mecha- nisms through which demography is typically understood are very distinct from mechanisms that drive signal effectiveness .
Finally , we build on a nascent body of previous work regarding minority representation in an organization and its alignment with the com- munity in which it is embedded by considering the alignment of representativeness within an organization and across organiza- tional levels .
Specifically , in three complementary studies , we investigate the relationship between management ethnic representativeness and interpersonal mistreatment .
First , we analyze the relationship be- tween management ethnic representativeness and experiences of harassment , bullying , and abuse the next year , as moderated by individuals ’ ethnic similarity to others in their organizations in a sample of 60,602 employees of Britain ’ s National Health Service .
Second , a constructive replication investigates perceived behav- ioral integrity as an explanatory mechanism that can account for the effects of representativeness using data from a nationally representative survey of working adults in the United States .
Third and finally , online survey data collected at two time points repli- cated these patterns and further integrated the effects of represen- tativeness and dissimilarity when they are measured using both objective and subjective strategies .
Collectively , these studies con- tribute to the extant literature by explaining why and for whom management ethnic representativeness affects interpersonal mis- treatment at work .
Management Ethnic Representativeness We define management ethnic representativeness as the degree to which the ethnic composition of managers in an organization mirrors or is misaligned with the ethnic composition of employees in that organization .
Similar to previous conceptualizations of relational demography examining similarity between an employee and supervisor ( Avery et al. , 2008 ) or between an employee and their work group , we assert that management ethnic representa- tiveness is an objective variable that can be calculated using organizational demographic data .
The key difference with man- agement ethnic representativeness is that this construct captures demographic similarity beyond an individual employee–supervisor or employee–workgroup pairing .
Indeed , management ethnic rep- resentativeness is a relational demography construct at the orga- nizational level of analysis , capturing the degree to which the ethnic composition of managers in an organization overall is either similar to or different from the ethnic composition of the employ- ees those managers serve .
Importantly , although this construct can be calculated objectively using organizational demographic data , it can also be measured more subjectively by surveying individuals in an organization regarding the degree to which they perceive that managers in an organization have a similar demographic profile when compared to the employees that they serve .
Drawing from previous work on relational demography and signaling theory , we assert that management ethnic representative- ness has a negative relationship with interpersonal mistreatment because a lack of this representativeness signals to incumbent employees that there is not truly equal opportunity with regard to ethnicity for advancement within the organization .
Importantly , this reasoning holds true regardless of the level of demographic diversity within the organization .
To demonstrate , consider the following examples .
On the one hand , an organization might have no ethnic diversity whatsoever ( i.e. , all White employees and all White managers ) .
This would result in high management ethnic representativeness and signal to incumbent employees that they have an equal opportunity for advancement within their organiza- tion with regard to ethnicity .
On the other hand , consider an organization that has very little ethnic diversity among their em- ployees ( e.g. , 10 in 100 employees are Hispanic whereas the other 90 are White ) and very little ethnic diversity among their managers ( e.g. , one in 10 managers is Hispanic and the others are White ) .
Although diversity in the organization overall remains low , man- agement ethnic representativeness would still be high in this ex- ample , given that the ethnic diversity in management mirrors the ethnic diversity in the rest of the organization .
Thus , this level of representativeness still signals to all incumbent employees that T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1546 LINDSEY , AVERY , DAWSON , AND KING they have an equal opportunity for advancement with regard to ethnicity , which we argue serves to minimize perceptions and experiences of mistreatment in the workplace .
Finally , consider an organization that has a considerable amount of ethnic diversity among employees , all of whom are overseen by White managers .
Although ethnic diversity in the organization overall may be relatively high , management ethnic representativeness would be very low in this example , which we assert sends problematic signals to both targets and perpetrators of mistreatment .
Note that this theoretical logic applies strictly to incumbents currently work- ing in an organization , not to prospective applicants .
Theoretical Foundation Signaling theory is based on the idea that some parties ( in our case , the organization ) have information that other parties ( in our case , employees of the organization ) do not .
Hence , employees need to use signals ( in our case , the demographic representative- ness of management ) to determine the character of their employing organization .
Signaling theory focuses primarily on the deliberate communication of positive information in an effort to convey positive organizational attributes to stakeholders .
An important assumption of this theory is that there is some level of information asymmetry between the organization and its stakeholders , and both parties are at least somewhat motivated to reduce that asymmetry ( Spence , 2002 ) .
In our case , an organization may claim that it values equal opportunity , but organizational leaders have more information than their stakeholders regarding the degree to which the organization truly possesses this value .
Thus , employees ( both targets and perpetrators of mistreatment ) may need to look for signals from the organization when determining if they work for a firm that truly provides equal opportunity to its employees or not .
Another important assumption of signaling theory is that some signals are more effective than others .
Indeed , theory and research support the notion that more observable signals tend to be more efficacious signals ( Connelly et al. , 2011 ) .
Signal observability refers to how visible a signal is to signal recipients .
It stands to reason that if a signal is not visible , it probably will not have much of an effect on signal recipients .
In our case , management ethnic representativeness is a highly visible signal that is likely to be observed by employees of an organization .
This representativeness is also likely high on signal frequency ( Janney & Folta , 2003 ) , meaning that employees view this signal just about every day at work .
Importantly , empirical work on signaling theory has indi- cated that ( a ) more visible signals are more effective ( Miller & del Carmen Triana , 2009 ) , and ( b ) increasing signal frequency im- proves the likelihood that a signal will be interpreted correctly ( Filatotchev & Bishop , 2002 ) .
Observability is considered to be a necessary but insufficient characteristic of efficacious signals ; indeed , effective signals are also difficult to fake , making them more likely to be interpreted as honest signals ( Connelly et al. , 2011 ) .
Using signaling theory terminology , management ethnic representativeness is also some- thing that is likely to be interpreted as an honest signal by em- ployees ( Durcikova & Gray , 2009 ) .
The idea behind this notion is that accurate ( i.e. , honest ) information can be exchanged between two parties if sending a signal requires effort on the part of the sender that only certain senders ( i.e. , organizations that actually value equal opportunity ) are likely to exhibit .
This is called the handicap principle ( Zahavi & Zahavi , 1977 ) and indicates that an organization high on management ethnic representativeness likely truly promotes and values equal opportunity for incumbent em- ployees , regardless of their ethnic backgrounds , within their orga- nization .
Indeed , we assert that high management ethnic represen- tativeness signals that an organization is invested in ensuring that all employee perspectives , relative to ethnicity , are represented across managerial levels .
The opposite of an honest signal would be if an organization states or implies that it values equal oppor- tunity but then does not have an ethnic profile in management that is representative of the organization as a whole .
Westphal and Zajac ( 2001 ) referred to this discrepancy between stated values and subsequent actions as decoupling .
Organizations that decouple their espoused values ( i.e. , equal opportunity ) and subsequent actions may develop a reputation for dishonesty , and employees may infer that they can not trust what the organization says they value as a result .
If a company has ethnically representative man- agement , it signals that they have followed through on their val- uation of equal opportunity .
If not , it signals that their behavior can not be trusted to match with their intentions .
Importantly , studies from multiple domains using signaling theory have indi- cated that honest signals are perceived as more credible , reliable , and valid ( e.g. , Certo , Daily , & Dalton , 2001 ; Lee , 2001 ) .
A final important assumption of signaling theory is that not everyone will perceive and interpret a signal in the same manner .
This refers to the signaling theory concepts of receiver attention and receiver interpretation .
Receiver attention reflects differences in the degree to which receivers are vigilantly scanning their environment for signals ( Connelly et al. , 2011 ) .
Empirical work has demonstrated that the effectiveness of a signal can depend in large part on whether receivers are actively looking for a signal ( Gulati & Higgins , 2003 ) .
Receiver interpretation refers to differ- ences in how a signal is interpreted after it is noticed ( Perkins & Hendry , 2005 ; Srivastava , 2001 ) .
For example , different applicants may calibrate or weight signals differently when forming their impression of an organization during recruitment and/or selection processes ( Highhouse et al. , 2007 ; Rynes , 1991 ) .
Although signaling theory and theories of relational demogra- phy may appear to produce similar predictions in terms of the effects of representativeness on interpersonal mistreatment , it is important to clearly specify both the relevant levels of analysis and the particular mechanisms underpinning the anticipated effects of each theory .
Relational demography theory , which largely focuses on the dyadic level of analysis , argues that similarity influences interpersonal experiences ( including mistreatment ) .
Organiza- tional demography theory generally contends that organizational diversity influences these experiences .
Both effects are typically argued to impact experience via social identity processes such as similarity-attraction .
Our focus on representativeness necessitates changing lenses of both the independent variable and the mediat- ing mechanisms .
Management representativeness is not the same as diversity .
The focus in this construct is not whether an organi- zation is diverse or whether a supervisor and employee are of the same ethnicity .
Instead , this construct captures the degree to which managers ’ ethnic backgrounds match the ethnic backgrounds of lower level employees .
Thus , the immediate effect of high or low levels of representativeness is not a social identity process like similarity-attraction .
Instead , the immediate impact of representa- tiveness is the signal it sends to employees , and the heuristics that T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1547MANAGEMENT ETHNIC REPRESENTATIVENESS employees use to interpret signals are quite different in signaling theory as compared to social identity theory .
Indeed , signaling theory is particularly relevant to management ethnic representa- tiveness ( which indicates a commitment to equal employment that conveys trustworthiness and honesty ) and not necessarily as rele- vant to traditional demography perspectives ( which focus on two parties being similar on the surface , and thus more compatible on a deeper level ) .
Management scholars have used signaling theory to explain how board characteristics ( Certo , 2003 ) and top management team characteristics ( Lester , Certo , Dalton , Dalton , & Cannella , 2006 ) influence important variables such as investments and organiza- tional performance .
The basic notion behind these studies is that having more prestigious board members signals to stakeholders that they should be confident in the direction and future perfor- mance capabilities of a firm .
Similarly , Miller and del Carmen Triana ( 2009 ) showed that having more heterogeneous board members with regard to gender and ethnicity served to increase the firm ’ s reputation , which the authors argue was driven by signaling a valuation of egalitarianism to external stakeholders .
Although these and other management studies use signaling theory to dem- onstrate how signals may affect organizational outsiders , we assert that a key group of signal recipients—individuals currently work- ing in the organization—has yet to be examined in the literature .
Thus , in the section that follows we explain why and for which incumbent employees management ethnic representativeness may be an important signal when considering how this representative- ness relates to interpersonal mistreatment in the workplace .
Management Ethnic Representativeness Signals Interpersonal Mistreatment Following Devine ’ s ( 1989 ) seminal work on the manifestations of bias beyond one ’ s conscious control , several authors have argued and supported the notion that modern discrimination man- ifests itself in various forms that vary in terms of their subtlety and severity ( e.g. , Brief , Dietz , Cohen , Pugh , & Vaslow , 2000 ; Swim , Mallett , & Stangor , 2004 ; Jones , Peddie , Gilrane , King , & Gray , 2016 ) .
Despite these advances , many research studies still focus solely on overt discrimination rather than examining interpersonal mistreatment in a more holistic manner .
Our work represents an important departure from this pattern by focusing on the broader outcome of interpersonal mistreatment , which we define as an umbrella term encompassing a wide range of negative interper- sonal behaviors , including emotional abuse , bullying , generalized workplace abuse , incivility , verbal aggression , disrespect , isola- tion , and discrimination ( Lim & Cortina , 2005 ) .
We know from previous empirical work that relational demog- raphy—similarity to the people with whom we work—matters for this outcome of interest .
Relational demography is grounded in social identity theory ( Tajfel & Turner , 1986 ) and predicts that greater demographic similarity to those in one ’ s workplace envi- ronment should lead to greater perceptions of fairness and less interpersonal mistreatment .
Indeed , emerging evidence suggests that demographic representativeness of organizations relative to their surrounding communities matters for both interpersonal ex- periences and organizational performance ( e.g. , Avery et al. , 2012 ; King et al. , 2011 ) .
Because interpersonal experiences of mistreat- ment and discrimination are often subtle and difficult to interpret ( Jones et al. , 2016 ) , the effects of relational demography can best be examined using a sense-making framework .
Using a sense-making perspective , organizations can be thought of as networks of shared meaning that are developed and main- tained via social interaction ( Walsh & Ungson , 1991 ) .
These social interactions in the workplace often present employees with am- biguous situations that can be interpreted in a number of ways ( Weick , 1979 ) .
Sense-making can then be defined as the attribu- tional process of assigning meaning to these ambiguous organiza- tional events ( Weick , 1995 ) .
This sense-making process is grounded in identity development and asserts that people interpret situations in a manner that is consistent with self-identities ( Ring & Van de Ven , 1989 ) .
As part of this process , individuals tend to categorize themselves and others in ways that will help them to interpret ambiguous social situations .
Importantly , people often rely on readily perceivable physical features such as ethnicity ( Fiske & Taylor , 1991 ) to guide their interpretations and sponta- neous categorization processes ( Jackson , Stone , & Alvarez , 1993 ) .
Indeed , Roberson and Stevens ( 2006 ) stated , “ to the extent that an organization has employees with visibly diverse demographics , such diversity is likely to be a significant feature in spontaneous sense-making in that workplace ” ( p. 380 ) .
Similarly , McKay and Avery ( 2006 ) referred to the presence of minority employees as “ direct and unambiguous diversity cues ” ( p. 400 ) .
The forgoing discussion indicates that management ethnic rep- resentativeness likely matters for employees within an organiza- tion .
Signaling theory provides us with an explanation for why it matters and for whom it might matter most .
As alluded to earlier , management ethnic representativeness is an organizational signal that is likely to be perceived as honest ( i.e. , an organization with high management ethnic representativeness likely promotes equal opportunity ) and highly visible and thus likely has an impact on interpersonal mistreatment in the workplace .
Of course , the con- tent of the cue is also important to consider when predicting how stakeholders will react to an organizational signal and what orga- nizational qualities that signal may indicate .
For instance , a high profile discrimination lawsuit is an honest and visible signal that might actually increase interpersonal mistreatment because it sends a negative signal regarding an organizational quality , namely that the organization does not value equal opportunity .
Conversely , we assert that management ethnic representativeness is an honest and visible signal that reduces interpersonal mistreatment at work by communicating that equal opportunity is valued .
Indeed , schol- ars have theorized that people engage in harassment and mistreat- ment behaviors to maintain the social hierarchy within an organi- zation ( Berdahl , 2007 ) .
We would argue that this tendency to engage in mistreatment to maintain the status quo is diminished in an organization that is ethnically representative across organiza- tional levels , thereby communicating its provision of opportunity to all of its employees .
Supporting this view , relational demography research generally has shown individuals who are more demographically similar to those in their workplace experience more supportive work envi- ronments and less discrimination ( Tsui & Gutek , 1999 ) .
Indeed , representation of ethnic minorities in management positions serves as a readily observable cue through which employees can under- stand the meaning of their ethnicity in a given workplace context ( McKay & Avery , 2006 ) .
Thus , when confronted with an ambig- uous situation that one needs to make sense of , those working in a T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1548 LINDSEY , AVERY , DAWSON , AND KING more representative organization will be less likely to categorize that situation as mistreatment when compared with employees working in less representative organizations .
We assert that rep- resentativeness may have an even stronger effect when individuals are reacting to representativeness in management .
Although we do not know of any research that directly supports this notion , we would note that managers and leaders are high status members of organizations , which may strengthen the signal of representative- ness at this level .
There are some studies in the extant literature that indirectly support this notion .
For example , work by Thomas ( 1999 ) has shown that having Blacks in leadership positions led White leaders to be more apt to mentor Black subordinates .
In addition , we know from work on gender and leadership that the presence of similar female leaders can serve as a signal to female employees that empowers women to be more effective on leader- ship tasks ( Latu , Mast , Lammers , & Bombari , 2013 ) and reduces self-stereotyping ( Asgari , Dasgupta , & Stout , 2012 ) .
Formally , we hypothesize the following : Hypothesis 1 : Management ethnic representativeness will have a negative relationship with interpersonal mistreatment , such that higher levels of representativeness are associated with lower levels of interpersonal mistreatment .
We further assert that ethnic dissimilarity moderates the rela- tionship proposed in Hypothesis 1 .
Importantly , although some conceptualizations of ethnic dissimilarity use one ’ s supervisor or one ’ s workgroup as the referent point , we take a broader approach here to examine individuals ’ ethnic dissimilarity from others in their organizations as a whole .
Given that our independent variable is management ethnic representativeness throughout one ’ s entire organization , we felt that this conceptualization of dissimilarity aligned most closely with the other variables represented in our theoretical model .
Scholars have noted previously that ethnicity is a source of status , with some ethnic groups being perceived as having higher status than others ( see Leslie , 2014 ) .
Indeed , ethnic minorities are considered lower status groups than Whites in the United Sates ( Simpson & Walker , 2002 ) and in the United Kingdom , and are often stigmatized as less capable employees ( Lyness & Heilman , 2006 ) .
This can create a burden of proving oneself as a good employee that is more challenging for ethnically dissimilar others when compared with the dominant group ( Heilman , 2001 ) .
These different standards could increase the likelihood that ethnic mi- norities are ( a ) cognizant and aware of the potential to be mis- treated , and ( b ) aware of the signal sent by the organization via management ethnic representativeness .
Using signaling theory ter- minology discussed earlier , we assert that more ethnically dissim- ilar others should be higher on receiver attention and more accu- rate in terms of receiver interpretation .
Indeed , research and theory indicate that individuals are more likely to attend to ethnicity of others when members of their own ethnic group are rare .
This has been referred to as distinctiveness ( McGuire , 1984 ) and tokenism ( Kanter , 1977 ) and indicates that the ethnic identities of the self and others will be more salient for ethnically dissimilar others when compared with their more similar counterparts .
Further- more , demographic similarity to others in one ’ s organization has been shown to enhance feelings of inclusion , trust , and support ( Foley , Linnehan , Greenhaus , & Weer , 2006 ; Pelled , Ledford , & Mohrmon , 1999 ) .
Thus , we predict the following : Hypothesis 2 : Ethnic dissimilarity will moderate the relation- ship between management representativeness and mistreat- ment , such that the relationship will be stronger for ethnically dissimilar individuals when compared with more ethnically similar individuals .
Importantly , most organizations do not want to be seen as discriminatory and thus strive to comply with norms surrounding equal opportunity for incumbent employees in hopes of gaining a sense of credibility and integrity among their constituents ( van der Walt & Ingley , 2003 ) .
Thus , having managers that are ethnically representative of the employees they supervise may be an effective way to signal that the organization actually does value equal opportunity for incumbent employees , regardless of their ethnic backgrounds .
Conversely , if an organization purports to possess this value yet lacks managerial ethnic representativeness , this may signal that the organization can not be trusted to follow through on its espoused values regarding equal opportunity .
In the parlance of signaling theory , this refers to the notion of decoupling discussed previously .
As noted , organizations that decouple their espoused values ( i.e. , equal opportunity ) and subsequent actions ( i.e. , man- agement ethnic representativeness ) run the risk of developing a reputation for dishonesty and may lose the trust of their constitu- ents over time ( Connelly et al. , 2011 ) .
Thus , perceived behavioral integrity is a mechanism that can account for the relationship between the management ethnic representativeness and the inter- personal mistreatment of individuals within the organization .
Perceived behavioral integrity can be defined as “ the perceived pattern of alignment between an actor ’ s words and deeds ” ( Si- mons , 2002 , p. 19 ) .
Importantly , it captures the perceived match between espoused values and subsequent actions , and is a charac- teristic ascribed to management , thus entailing an internal attribu- tion for an observed pattern of behavior ( Simons , Friedman , Liu , & McLean Parks , 2007 ) .
It stands to reason that if an organization matches their espoused values and behaviors with regard to valu- ing equal opportunity , perceived behavioral integrity would be high , which could then in turn reduce experiences and interpreta- tions of interpersonal mistreatment at work .
Conversely , if an organization decouples their espoused values and behaviors with regard to valuing equal opportunity , we would expect perceived behavioral integrity to be lower , which could then in turn increase interpersonal mistreatment in the workplace by communicating to employees that the organization does not take their valuation of equal opportunity seriously .
We assert that perceptions of behavioral integrity could impact interpersonal mistreatment at work for at least two reasons .
First , perpetrators of mistreatment could notice if they work in an organization that is low on management ethnic representativeness and develop their own perceptions of low behavioral integrity .
In turn , these perceptions may serve as a cue to potential perpetrators of mistreatment that such behaviors are tolerable and acceptable within their organization , making them more likely to mistreat ethnically dissimilar others at work .
Support for this assertion comes from research and theorizing on the concept of ethical leadership , which proposes that employees are likely to engage in more ethical decision-making , more prosocial behaviors , and less T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1549MANAGEMENT ETHNIC REPRESENTATIVENESS counterproductive work behaviors when they believe their leaders are ethical and trustworthy ( see Brown & Treviño , 2006 ) .
Second , targets of mistreatment may use their own perceptions of behav- ioral integrity as a cue when engaging in sense-making processes to determine if they experienced mistreatment or not .
It stands to reason that targets of mistreatment will be more likely to catego- rize inappropriate behaviors as such when they have lower per- ceptions of managers ’ behavioral integrity .
Indeed , prior scholar- ship suggests lower behavioral integrity is related to diminished trust ( Simons , 2002 ) .
Moreover , when employees lose trust in their organization and its decision-makers , they may be more apt to attribute ambiguous mistreatment to discrimination ( Major & Saw- yer , 2009 ) .
Signaling theory further substantiates the role of perceived honesty : a core tenant of the theory is that signals interpreted as honest are more impactful than those interpreted as dishonest .
The concept of perceived behavioral integrity is uniquely positioned to capture this honesty because it explicitly reflects the degree to which management in an organization is perceived as authentic .
It follows that we argue that perceived behavioral integrity captures the process by which a signal from the organization could lead to important outcomes for individuals within that organization .
Im- portantly , we do not wish to imply that perceived behavioral integrity is the only explanatory mechanism that can account for the effect of management ethnic representativeness on interper- sonal mistreatment , which is why we only propose partial media- tion here .
Indeed , firms with greater management ethnic represen- tativeness also may have different systems , processes ( diversity training ) , or cultures ( of inclusiveness ) which serve to reduce interpersonal mistreatment .
Accordingly , we hypothesize the fol- lowing : Hypothesis 3 : Perceived behavioral integrity will partially mediate the negative relationship between management ethnic representativeness and interpersonal mistreatment , such that the relationship between management ethnic representative- ness and perceived behavioral integrity will be positive , and the relationship between perceived behavioral integrity and interpersonal mistreatment will be negative .
Perceptions of behavioral integrity also likely depend on char- acteristics of perceivers .
In particular , sensitivity to matching be- havioral actions with espoused values regarding equal opportunity is at least partially determined by the degree to which employees habitually assess their environments for integrity cues ( Simons , 2002 ) .
Such vigilance is more common among people who feel different from others in their environment ( e.g. , Simons et al. , 2007 ) .
Essentially , we assert that ethnically dissimilar individuals are more likely to be scanning their environments for integrity cues ( i.e. , they are high on receiver attention ) , making them more likely to infer behavioral integrity ( or lack thereof ) as it arises from management ethnic representativeness .
Indeed , empirical work has shown that ethnically dissimilar individuals may be more sensitive to detecting behavioral integrity as it arises from organizational signals and reacting to it in the form of trust in management and justice perceptions ( Simons et al. , 2007 ) .
In turn , these perceptions of behavioral integrity that are linked with trust and justice beliefs could play an important role when employees ( especially ethni- cally dissimilar employees ) are making sense of diversity-related incidents at work and interpreting them as mistreatment or not .
We assert that ethnically dissimilar employees are more likely to use perceived behavioral integrity as a lens through which to interpret diversity-related incidents at work when compared to more ethni- cally similar employees .
Thus , we hypothesize the following : Hypothesis 4 : Ethnic dissimilarity will moderate the indirect relationship between management representativeness and in- terpersonal mistreatment , such that effects will be stronger for ethnically dissimilar individuals when compared with more ethnically similar individuals .
This moderation will occur at each stage of the mediation model .
We additionally investigate objective and subjective indicators of both management ethnic representativeness and ethnic dissim- ilarity .
Although an objective metric for management ethnic rep- resentativeness can be calculated using organizational data , a sub- jective metric for this variable also can be obtained by asking individuals directly the degree to which they perceive alignment of ethnic diversity across organizational levels .
Similarly , although an objective metric for ethnic dissimilarity can be calculated using organizational data , a subjective metric for this variable can also be obtained by asking individuals directly the degree to which they perceive they are ethnically similar or dissimilar from others in their organizations .
Given that organizations and scholars are likely to use both types of indicators in their work , we felt that it was important to include this distinction in our work as well .
Specifically , we think it is logical to assume that objective management ethnic representativeness will have a positive rela- tionship with subjective management ethnic representativeness , given that individuals likely use objective indicators of this vari- able in forming their perceptions .
Indeed , signaling theory indi- cates that employees likely use objective organizational cues when forming their subjective organizational perceptions ( Connelly et al. , 2011 ) .
In addition , empirical work on diversity climate has shown that numerical representation cues are positively related to perceptions that an organization has a pro-diversity climate ( Mc- Kay , Avery , & Morris , 2008 ) .
Thus , we formally hypothesize the following : Hypothesis 5 : Objective management ethnic representative- ness will have a positive relationship with subjective manage- ment ethnic representativeness .
In addition , we assert that both objective and subjective indica- tors of ethnic dissimilarity will have independent moderating ef- fects on the aforementioned positive relationship , in addition to the other relationships in the mediation chain .
Similar to previously introduced arguments , those who are more ethnically dissimilar to others in their organization are likely higher on the signaling theory concept of receiver attention , making them more likely to attend to objective indicators of management ethnic representa- tiveness .
This heightened attention should also increase receiver interpretation accuracy , making the relationship between objective and subjective indicators of management ethnic representativeness stronger for those more ethnically dissimilar to others in their workplace .
In sum , we propose a moderated mediation model in which management ethnic representativeness is negatively related to interpersonal mistreatment through the mediating mechanism of perceived behavioral integrity .
We further propose that the indirect T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1550 LINDSEY , AVERY , DAWSON , AND KING effect is moderated by ethnic dissimilarity , such that the effects are stronger for ethnically dissimilar individuals when compared with those who are more ethnically similar to others in their organiza- tion ( see Figure 1 ) .
Although we only test Hypotheses 1 and 2 in Study 1 , we test more complete models with our Study 2 and Study 3 data .
Importantly , we only examine the distinction between objective and subjective indicators of management ethnic repre- sentativeness and ethnic dissimilarity in Study 3 .
Study 1 : Method Setting and Sample Data were taken from the 2009 and 2010 national staff surveys of the National Health Service ( NHS ) in England ( see Appendix ) .
This annual survey is administered to a sample of employees within each separate organization in the NHS , known as “ trusts. ” A number of different types of organizations exist within the NHS , with the experiences of employees being substantially different within each , due to differing tasks and levels of patient contact ( e.g. , people working in ambulance trusts generally have very different jobs from those working in community health centers ) .
To ensure participants were working in a similar context , we limit our analysis to employees working in “ acute trusts ” —typically individual hospitals , or a small number of geographically close hospitals working under a single management structure .
For the sake of simplicity , we refer to these henceforth as “ hospitals , ” although in reality some cover more than one hospital building .
There were 147 hospitals in the 2009 and 2010 surveys .
The hospital data can be linked by year , although for reasons of confidentiality the individual responses are not tracked longitudi- nally .
Our analysis uses individual data from the 2010 survey , with hospital-level representativeness coming from the 2009 survey .
The rationale for using lagged data is twofold .
First , the data on mistreatment relates to mistreatment in the previous 12 months , whereas the data on ethnicity is current .
Therefore , if we were to use data from one year only , the timing of the variables is not in line with the hypothesized direction of causality , and as there are moderate levels of turnover at many organizations , we can not assume that the representativeness one year is the same as it is the next .
Second , although we acknowledge that data on self-report ethnicity is likely to be very accurate and therefore that source of common method bias is unlikely to be an issue , there are likely to be some small deviations in sample characteristics from year to year , and therefore by using data from two years we are reducing the chances of effects being due to sampling bias .
In 2010 there were 60,602 responses from 118,801 distributed questionnaires ( a response rate of 51 % 1 ) ; the number of responses in each hospital varied between 275 and 581 , with hospital-level response rates between 33 % and 71 % .
Of these respondents , 85 % classified themselves as White , 4 % as Black or Black British , 8 % as Asian or Asian British , 1 % as mixed ethnic background , and 2 % as other ethnic background , with 3 % not saying .
Numbers from the 2009 survey were very similar on all counts .
Measures Management ethnic representativeness ( objective ) .
Manage- ment ethnic representativeness , the independent variable , was cap- tured from the 2009 survey data using the formula from Avery et al .
( 2012 ) .
Within each hospital , the representativeness was calcu- lated to determine the extent to which employees in positions of line management ( accounting for 30 % of respondents ) were rep- resentative of the remainder of the workforce according to the five major ethnic background categories used in the survey ( and used in the U.K. Census ) : White , Black/Black British , Asian/Asian Brit- ish , Mixed , or Other .
This was measured at the hospital level .
The index is scored between 0 and 1 , where 1 represents perfect representativeness and 0 would represent no correspondence at all between the managers and the rest of the workforce .
Ethnic dissimilarity ( objective ) .
Ethnic dissimilarity , the moderator , was calculated using the euclidean distance , as is common in relational demography research ( Harrison & Klein , 2007 ) .
It measures the extent to which each individual is dissimilar in ethnic background to all other respondents in the same hospital in the 2010 survey , such that a higher score means that the individual shares his or her ethnic background with a smaller proportion of colleagues .
Interpersonal mistreatment .
Mistreatment , the outcome , was an individual level variable calculated from two questions about aggression at work in the 2010 survey .
Respondents were asked “ In the last 12 months have you personally experienced physical violence at work from your manager/team leader or other colleagues ? ” , and “ In the last 12 months have you personally experienced harassment , bullying or abuse at work from your manager/team leader or other colleagues ? ” .
If the respondent an- swered “ Yes ” to either , they were recorded as having experienced mistreatment .
Control variables .
We controlled for occupational group ( seven categories ) , ethnic background ( five categories ) , gender , age , and length of service .
The latter two were measured on six-point ordinal scales ( age : 16–20 , 21–30 , 31–40 , 41–50 , 51–65 , 1 While the reliability of measures based on low response rates is imperfect , there is evidence to suggest that the overall validity should not be a significant problem : the overall profile of respondents in terms of ethnic group is very similar to that of the National Health Service as a whole .
Specifically , the comparison of the five different ethnic groupings that we use are as follows : White ( 85.2 % in our sample , 83.6 % overall ) ; Asian ( 8.0 % ; 8.2 % ) ; Black ( 4.2 % ; 5.3 % ) ; Mixed ( 1.1 % ; 1.4 % ) ; and Other ( 1.6 % ; 1.5 % ) .
Therefore , the overall validity of the measure seems rea- sonable , but the reliability on an organizational level is worth further examination .
As management ethnic representativeness is an index for which the psychometric properties under different response rates has not been well tested , we ran a simulation study in R to examine the likely reliability of this metric .
Specifically , we used actual organization sizes , observed ethnic group proportions , and assumed random responses with an average response rate of 51 % ( as observed , but with the observed variation across organizations ) .
Across 10,000 simulations , the value of management ethnic representativeness calculated from the sample correlated with the actual value of management ethnic representativeness with a median level of 0.955 , and a minimum level of 0.920 .
This therefore suggests that the reliability of management ethnic representativeness on such a sample is very strong , and certainly better than the reliability of most constructs used in applied psychology research generally .
This is largely due to the sub- stantial within-organization sample sizes .
Likewise , under the same simu- lation conditions , we examined what happens to ethnic dissimilarity mea- sures , but separately for different ethnic groups .
The correlations here were even higher : even the smallest correlations across 10,000 simulations exceeded 0.99 for all ethnic groups .
Overall , therefore , we believe that both the management ethnic representativeness and ethnic dissimilarity mea- sures are valid and reliable despite the response rate .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1551MANAGEMENT ETHNIC REPRESENTATIVENESS or over 65 ; length of service : less than a year , 1–2 years , 3–5 years , 6–10 years , 11–15 years , or over 16 years ) .
Analysis The analysis required multilevel modeling of a binary outcome , with predictors at both Level 2 ( hospital—representativeness ) and Level 1 ( individual dissimilarity , as well as the control variables ) .
A generalized linear mixed model ( specifically , a multilevel binary logistic regression ) was therefore used , with analysis conducted in Mplus .
Because of some incomplete data ( 6.2 % of cases had at least one value missing ) , maximum likelihood estimation was used .
Study 1 : Results Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics and correlations for all study variables at the individual level .
The statistics for manage- ment ethnic representativeness applied at a hospital level are almost identical .
Table 2 shows the results of models to test Hypotheses 1 and 2 .
Model 1 , testing the direct effect between management ethnic representativeness and mistreatment , finds that the effect is not statistically significant ( coefficient 0.43 , p .32 ) , therefore not supporting Hypothesis 1 .
Model 2 tests the moderating effect of individual ethnic dissim- ilarity on the same relationship .
It can be seen that the interaction term between management ethnic representativeness and ethnic dissimilarity is statistically significant ( coefficient 1.87 , p .028 ) , suggesting that there is a moderating effect .
The interaction term is negative , suggesting that the relationship between manage- ment ethnic representativeness and mistreatment is more negative for individuals who are more dissimilar to their colleagues in terms of ethnic background , thus providing support for Hypothesis 2 .
This interaction is shown graphically in Figure 2 .
It can be seen that , when dissimilarity is high ( e.g. , for an employee from an ethnic minority background in a hospital where the vast majority of the workforce is White ) , there is a negative relationship between Table 1 Descriptive Statistics and Correlations of Study 1 Variables Variable M SD Correlations 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 .
Interpersonal mistreatment 16 % 36 % 2 .
Management ethnic representativeness .94 .04 .01 3 .
Ethnic dissimilarity .31 .39 .04 .30 4 .
Gendera .20 .40 .01 .02 .13 5 .
Ageb 3.77 1.07 .02 .03 .10 .01 6 .
Length of serviceb 3.96 1.59 .01 .07 .17 .08 .51 7 .
Ethnic group : White 85 % 36 % .04 .21 .94 .12 .09 .16 8 .
Ethnic group : Black/Black British 4 % 20 % .03 .16 .44 .01 .00 .07 9 .
Ethnic group : Asian/Asian British 8 % 27 % .02 .12 .66 .12 .09 .13 10 .
Ethnic group : Mixed 1 % 11 % .02 .03 .27 .02 .04 .04 11 .
Ethnic group : Other 2 % 13 % .02 .06 .31 .06 .02 .04 Note .
Descriptive statistics and correlations for multicategory variables occupational group and ethnic back- ground not shown but are available on request .
a Gender : 1 male , 0 female .
b Age and length of service both measured ordinally ( scale from 1 to 6 ) .
p .05 for all correlations except those between gender and age , and age and Black/Black British ethnic group .
Figure 1 .
Theoretical model .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1552 LINDSEY , AVERY , DAWSON , AND KING representativeness and the probability of experiencing mistreat- ment : If the ethnic profile of managers in the hospital reflects the rest of the workforce , then the minority individual is less likely to experience interpersonal mistreatment .
Although simple slope tests for continuous moderators are generally arbitrary ( Dawson , 2014 ) , calculating the effect of representativeness for typical low and high values of ethnic dissimilarity ( values at the 10th and 90th percen- tiles ) shows that the conditional odds ratios of the effect of repre- sentativeness for these values are 1.889 and 0.265 , respectively .
That is , at low levels of dissimilarity , there is a small positive relationship between representativeness and the likelihood of ex- periencing mistreatment ; for high levels , there is a moderately large negative effect ( using effect sizes as described by Haddock , Rindskopf , & Shadish , 1998 ) .
These results speak to the importance of attending to the align- ment between managers and the employees they manage beyond simply focusing on representation .
Indeed , if employers seek to enhance representation of ethnic minorities in management posi- tions without mirroring this representation at the employee level ( which would reflect overrepresentation of ethnic minorities , as opposed to underrepresentation ) , this could actually lead to a detrimental increase in interpersonal mistreatment for employees within the organization .
To test this notion empirically , we created a binary code for overrepresentation versus underrepresentation of ethnic minorities in management and tested this as a moderator of both the direct relationship between representativeness and inter- personal mistreatment and that same relationship as moderated by ethnic dissimilarity .
Results revealed that this binary moderator did not have a significant effect on these relationships ( ps .33 ) , supporting the generalizability of our findings and the notion that overrepresentation and underrepresentation may be equally detri- mental in terms of engendering interpersonal mistreatment at work .
Study 1 : Discussion The purpose of Study 1 was to examine the hypothesized negative effect of management ethnic representativeness on inter- personal mistreatment at work .
Furthermore , we investigated whether ethnic dissimilarity would moderate this effect , hypothe- sizing that the effects would be stronger for ethnically dissimilar employees when compared with more ethnically similar individ- uals .
The results show that , although its main effect was not significant , management representativeness matters to employees differently depending on relational demography ; a two-way inter- action between management ethnic representativeness and ethnic dissimilarity emerged in predicting interpersonal mistreatment .
Specifically , although the relationship between management ethnic representativeness and interpersonal mistreatment was negative for ethnically dissimilar individuals , this same relationship appears to be positive for more ethnically similar individuals .
This means that although management ethnic representativeness engendered lower levels of interpersonal mistreatment the following year among Table 2 Results of Multilevel Binary Logistic Regression Hypothesis Tests—Study 1 Variable Model 1 Model 2 Coefficient ( SE ) Odds ratio Coefficient ( SE ) Odds ratio Occupational group : Medical/dental .29 ( .05 ) .75 .29 ( .06 ) .75 Allied health professionals .21 ( .04 ) .81 .21 ( .04 ) .81 Administrative .25 ( .04 ) .78 .25 ( .04 ) .78 Managers .01 ( .09 ) .99 .02 ( .09 ) .99 Maintenance/ancillary .15 ( .06 ) .86 .15 ( .06 ) .86 Other .05 ( .06 ) .95 .05 ( .06 ) .95 Ethnic group : Black/Black British .35 ( .05 ) 1.42 .14 ( .12 ) 1.42 Asian/Asian British .22 ( .04 ) 1.25 .01 ( .12 ) 1.25 Mixed .40 ( .11 ) 1.50 .17 ( .17 ) 1.50 Other .42 ( .08 ) 1.53 .19 ( .14 ) 1.53 Gender ( Male ) .07 ( .03 ) .93 .07 ( .03 ) .93 Age .06 ( .01 ) 1.07 .06 ( .01 ) 1.07 Length of service .00 ( .01 ) 1.00 .01 ( .01 ) 1.00 Representativeness .43 ( .43 ) .65 .73 ( .70 ) .65 Ethnic dissimilarity 1.97 ( .86 ) 7.19 Interaction 1.87 ( 2.19 ) .15 Note .
Reference category for occupational group is nurses .
Reference category for ethnic group is White .
p .05. p .001 .
10 % 15 % 20 % 25 % Low representativeness High representativeness tne mtaertsi m gnicneirepxe fo ytilibaborP Low dissimilarity High dissimilarity Figure 2 .
Moderating effect of ethnic dissimilarity on the relationship between management ethnic representativeness and interpersonal mistreat- ment—Study 1 .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1553MANAGEMENT ETHNIC REPRESENTATIVENESS those who were ethnically dissimilar from those in their work- place , this same variable predicted higher levels of interpersonal mistreatment the following year among those who we more eth- nically similar to those in their workplace .
We interpret this positive relationship as an example of majority backlash ( e.g. , claims of reverse discrimination ) .
Majority members ( who would represent the largest share of those high in ethnic similarity ) often feel a sense of entitlement to spoils such as higher level positions .
In representative organizations , everyone present at lower levels has their fair share of these higher-level positions .
Thus , expecta- tions among majority members ( of receiving a disproportionately high share ) are violated , which could result in greater perceptions of mistreatment or claims of “ reverse ” discrimination .
A further strength of this study is the use of lagged data : representativeness as measured in 2009 predicted mistreatment occurring between 2009 and 2010 .
The same moderated relation- ship was not found if we examined data within a single year only , probably because the mistreatment refers to a period prior to the measurement of representativeness .
In the interest of replicating this finding , we also examined archival data from the previous two years .
Although the interaction effect did not reach statistical significance when looking at data from 2008 to 2009 , it did when examining data from 2007 to 2008 , thus providing further support for our hypothesis .
A limitation of this study is that representa- tiveness is calculated on the basis of survey responses , rather than data about the whole organizations .
Although we can not know for certain whether responses are equally likely from all ethnic groups , we do note that the ethnic group profile of the survey respondents is very similar to that of the National Health Service as a whole , and therefore differential response rates by ethnic groups is un- likely to be a major problem ( Health & Social Care Information Centre , 2011 ) .
In addition , the fact that most organizations in Study 1 are predominantly White means there is not as much variation to analyze as would be ideal .
We conducted Study 2 to build on these findings while investigating perceived behavioral integrity as a mediator that can account for the moderated rela- tionship between management ethnic representativeness and inter- personal mistreatment .
Study 2 : Method Sample and Procedure We used data from the 2002 National Study of the Changing Workforce ( Bond , Thompson , Galinsky , & Prottas , 2003 ; see the Appendix ) .
Bond et al .
telephoned individuals selected at random to inquire about a variety of subjects including issues of work— family and other more general workplace perceptions ( total indi- viduals contacted 2,390 ; response rate 52 % ) .
All participants were civilian , wage-earning employees , and we included only the responses of those with complete data on the measures of interest described below ( N 1,575 ) .
The usable sample included slightly more women ( n 864 ) than men ( n 711 ) , and was 76.9 % White , 10.7 % Black , 6.9 % Hispanic , and 5.5 % belonging to a different ethnic background .
The average participant was 42 years of age ( SD 12.4 ) and had been with the company for about 8 years ( SD 8.7 ) .
The most frequently reported occupations in- cluded 14.5 % retail trade , 14.0 % manufacturing , 12.1 % medical service , and 11.2 % educational services .
Measures Interpersonal mistreatment .
Similar to prior studies ( e.g. , Avery et al. , 2008 ) , we used the following item to indicate whether or not the participant had experienced mistreatment on the basis of their ethnic group membership : “ Do you feel in ANY way dis- criminated against on your job because of your race or national origin ? ” Responses were coded such that 0 no and 1 yes .
Perceived behavioral integrity .
We used responses to the two items employed by Prottas ( 2013 ) to assess behavioral integ- rity ( .78 ) .
The items are “ I can trust what managers say in my organization ” and “ Managers in my organization behave honestly and ethically when dealing with employees and clients or custom- ers. ” Responses were on a 4-point scale from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 4 ( strongly agree ) .
Management ethnic representativeness ( subjective ) .
Participant agreement ranging from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 4 ( strongly agree ) with the following item was used to assess the degree of manage- ment ethnic representativeness in their workplace : “ Top manage- ment in my organization includes about the same percentages of people of different racial , ethnic , and national backgrounds as the rest of the workforce in my organization. ” Ethnic dissimilarity ( subjective ) .
To maximize consistency with the first study , we combined and reverse-coded responses inquiring about the ethnic similarity of participants ’ supervisor ( “ Is your supervisor or manager of the same racial or ethnic back- ground as you ? ” ) and coworkers ( “ About what percentage of your coworkers are of people from your racial , ethnic , or national background ? ” ) .
Because the responses to these items involved dif- ferent formats , we standardized each before aggregating them to form an indicator with higher scores indicating greater dissimilarity .
On its face , these measures may seem to tap different constructs , but combining them is actually quite consistent with common practice in the diversity literature .
The most common approaches to capturing ethnic dissimilarity involve using either the proportion of ethnically similar individuals in an interactive multilevel model ( e.g. , Level 1 Black Dummy Variable Level 2 % Black Employ- ees ) or Euclidean distance , which is essentially the square root of the proportion of dissimilar employees .
Like our composite , the employee proportions utilized in these two approaches commonly include both coworkers and supervisors .
Thus , we feel confident that combining them is theoretically sound and consistent with ( though not identical to ) prior approaches .
Looking at the empir- ical evidence provides some additional support for our measure- ment approach .
For instance , an exploratory factor analysis re- vealed a single factor accounting for 76.20 % of the variance in the two items .
Moreover , Cronbach ’ s alpha for the two items is .69 .
Though this level of internal consistency is slightly lower than the commonly used .7 threshold , we contend that this is more a product of only two items being included , as this estimate of internal consistency is influenced by the number of items included .
Control variables .
As in Study 1 , we used data concerning employee ethnicity , gender , age , and tenure as control variables .
Study 2 : Results The means , standard deviations , and correlations for all vari- ables are located in Table 3 .
Hypothesis 1 , which predicted a negative relationship between management ethnic representative- ness and interpersonal mistreatment , was tested using hierarchical T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1554 LINDSEY , AVERY , DAWSON , AND KING logistic regression .
After accounting for the influence of the con- trols , representativeness exhibited the anticipated negative effect ( b .40 , SE .10 , p .01 , Odds ratio [ OR ] .67 ) , indicating that employees who perceived their organization as more repre- sentative were less likely to indicate that they had experienced interpersonal mistreatment .
Thus , Hypothesis 1 was supported .
Hypothesis 2 proposed that ethnic dissimilarity moderates the representativeness-mistreatment relationship such that it is more pronounced among employees who are more dissimilar to their workplace counterparts .
The Dissimilarity Representativeness interaction did not , however , exhibit a significant relationship with mistreatment ( b .08 , SE .10 , p .44 , OR .92 ) .
Conse- quently , Hypothesis 2 was not supported in this study .
We used SPSS applications introduced by Hayes ( 2013 ) ; Ed- wards , and Lambert ( 2007 ) to compute bootstrapped confidence intervals for our simple and moderated mediation analyses .
One reason we may have failed to detect the interaction proposed in Hypothesis 2 is that it may function indirectly .
In fact , Hypothesis 3 predicted an indirect effect of management ethnic representa- tiveness on interpersonal mistreatment through perceived behav- ioral integrity .
Hypothesis 4 predicted that ethnic dissimilarity between an individual and others in the workplace moderates this indirect relationship such that the relationship between represen- tativeness and mistreatment is significantly stronger when employ- ees are more dissimilar .
Because the dependent variable ( i.e. , discrimination ) is binary , we used logistic regression for testing the Stage 2 effects .
In testing Hypothesis 3 , we computed bootstrapped confidence intervals for the indirect effect linking representativeness and mistreatment through perceived behavioral integrity .
Though the direct effect remains significant in the presence of the proposed mediator ( b .31 , SE .10 , p .01 ) , the indirect effect was statistically significant as well ( b .12 , SE .02 , p .01 , 99 % confidence interval [ CI ] .18 to .06 ) .
This effect captures significant effects of management ethnic representativeness on perceived behavioral integrity ( b .13 , SE .02 , p .01 ) as well as perceived behavioral integrity on interpersonal mistreatment ( b .86 , SE .12 , p .01 ) .
This pattern ( which some would refer to as partial mediation ) supports Hypothesis 3 .
Turning to Hypothesis 4 , we conducted what amounts to mod- erated path analysis ( see Table 4 for a summary ) to determine whether any of the three paths between representativeness and discrimination were moderated by ethnic dissimilarity ( Edwards & Lambert , 2007 ) .
As Figure 3 illustrates , the relationship between representativeness and perceived behavioral integrity ( Stage 1 ) was fairly consistent irrespective of how ethnically dissimilar the focal employee was from others in their workplace .
However , the effects at Stage 2 ( i.e. , the behavioral integrity-interpersonal mis- treatment linkage ) appeared contingent upon ethnic dissimilarity .
In fact , the impact of behavioral integrity was nearly twice as strong when dissimilarity was higher ( i.e. , one SD above the mean ) than when it was lower ( 1 SD below the mean ; .95 [ SE .13 ] vs. .51 [ SE .22 ] ) .
Though both of the conditional indirect effects were statistically significant ( low dissimilarity : .06 , SE .03 , Table 3 Means , Standard Deviations , and Correlations for Study 2 Variable M SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 .
Female .55 .50 2 .
Black .11 .31 .07 3 .
Hispanic .07 .25 .00 4 .
Other ethnicity .06 .23 .02 5 .
Tenure 8.37 8.68 .09 .05 .04 .02 6 .
Age 41.61 12.38 .02 .07 .07 .00 .48 7 .
Representativeness 2.62 1.12 .01 .11 .01 .03 .01 .00 8 .
Ethnic dissimilarity .07 .87 .01 .35 .25 .22 .04 .07 .08 9 .
Behavioral integrity 1.97 .86 .04 .09 .02 .01 .09 .04 .18 .07 10 .
Mistreatment .06 .24 .03 .16 .09 .03 .04 .02 .13 .24 .23 Note .
N 1,575 .
Female ( female 1 ) and ethnicity ( White referent ) are dummy coded .
p .05. p .01 .
Table 4 Moderated Mediation Analysis of Effects : Management Ethnic Representativeness on Ethnic Discrimination , as Moderated by Ethnic Dissimilarity in Study 2 Moderator variable Stage Effect First Second Direct Indirect Total Ethnic dissimilarity Low .11 ( .03 ) .51 ( .22 ) .21 ( .19 ) .06 ( .03 ) .27 High .15 ( .03 ) .95 ( .13 ) .29 ( .11 ) .15 ( .03 ) .44 Differences .04 .44 .08 .09 .17 Note .
N 1,575 .
Numbers in parentheses are standard errors .
Tests of differences for the indirect and total effect were based on bias-corrected confidence intervals derived from bootstrap estimates .
p .05. p .01 .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1555MANAGEMENT ETHNIC REPRESENTATIVENESS 95 % CI .13 to .01 ; high dissimilarity : .15 , SE .03 , 99 % CI .24 to .07 ) , the moderation at Stage 2 helped produce a significant difference between the conditional indirect effects ( .09 , 99 % CI .002 to .173 ) , which indicates the presence of moder- ated mediation .
In short , the negative indirect effect of manage- ment ethnic representativeness on mistreatment through perceived behavioral integrity is stronger for employees who are more eth- nically dissimilar from their peers .
Hence , Hypothesis 4 also received support .
Study 2 : Discussion The results of a nationally representative survey complement and extend the findings of Study 1 .
Building on the finding that ethnic similarity moderates the relationship between management representativeness and interpersonal mistreatment , we examined perceived behavioral integrity as an explanatory mechanism .
Re- sults supported Hypothesis 3 , which predicted that perceived be- havioral integrity would mediate the relationship between man- agement ethnic representativeness and interpersonal mistreatment at work .
Thus , perceived behavioral integrity can be thought of as an explanation for why representativeness engenders experiences of mistreatment in the workplace .
Results also supported Hypoth- esis 4 , which predicted that the indirect effect proposed in Hy- pothesis 3 would be stronger for ethnically dissimilar employees when compared with those who are more ethnically similar to others in their workplace .
Interestingly , this finding of moderated mediation seems to have been driven by the second path in the mediation model , meaning that the relationship between perceived behavioral integrity and interpersonal mistreatment was substan- tially stronger for employees who were more ethnically dissimilar from others in their workplaces .
Thus , although management eth- nic representativeness may give rise to perceptions of behavioral integrity for all employees , these perceptions of behavioral integ- rity may have a stronger effect on interpersonal mistreatment for employees in the minority at work .
Notable shortcomings of Study 2 include the use of cross- sectional data to test a mediation model and the use of one- or two-item measures to assess all variables of interest .
In addition , there are inconsistencies with regard to how our independent and dependent variables were measured across Studies 1 and 2 .
Thus , in an effort to reconcile these shortcomings , we have conducted a third study in which we use multi-item measures for all variables of interest in addition to measuring our independent and dependent variables at different time points to appropriately replicate our Study 2 findings .
Finally , we use both objective and subjective measurement strategies to investigate differential effects of objec- tive versus subjective representativeness and dissimilarity .
This allowed us to test a more complex mediation series model in which we expected that objective representativeness ( the independent variable ) would be positively associated with subjective represen- tativeness ( the first mediator ) , which would then have a positive impact on perceptions of behavioral integrity ( the second media- tor ) , which in turn would be negatively associated with interper- sonal mistreatment ( the dependent variable ) .
We also examined whether this mediation chain is moderated by both objective and subjective dissimilarity , expecting to find stronger effects for those more ethnically dissimilar to others in their workplaces .
Study 3 : Method Participants and Procedure The original sample consisted of 330 employees working at least 30 hr per week recruited via Amazon ’ s Mechanical Turk .
The sample was 55 % male , 61 % White , 25 % Asian , 7 % Black , 4 % Hispanic , and 3 % were of another ethnicity .
The sample had an average age of 35 years old and an average tenure of 6 years with their organization .
Of this original sample , 248 participants com- pleted the second time point , for a retention rate of 75 % .
The sample that completed the study was very similar demographically to the original sample .
Indeed , this sample was 52 % male , 63 % White , 25 % Asian , 7 % Black , 4 % Hispanic , and 1 % were of another ethnicity .
This sample had an average age of 36 years old and an average tenure of 6 years at their organization .
Compen- sation was provided in the form of $ 0.50 for each completed time point .
Participants first completed a short Web-based survey that contained items related to representativeness , dissimilarity , and perceived behavioral integrity .
Then , a few days later , participants were asked to complete a follow-up survey which contained items related to experiences of interpersonal mistreatment at work .
Measures Management ethnic representativeness ( objective ) .
To measure objective management ethnic representativeness as simi- larly as possible to Study 1 , we first asked participants to estimate the percentage of managers/leaders/supervisors in their organiza- tion who were from the following ethnic groups : ( a ) African American/Black ; ( b ) Asian , Asian American/Pacific Islander ; ( c ) Caucasian/White American , European , not Hispanic ; ( d ) Chi- cano ( a ) /Mexican American , Latino ( a ) /Hispanic American ; ( e ) Na- tive American/American Indian ; ( f ) Mixed ; parents are from two different groups ; or ( g ) Other .
We then used participants ’ estimates of ethnic representativeness of non-managers in their organizations ( which was measured using the same categories ) and the formula from Avery et al .
( 2012 ) to calculate management ethnic repre- sentativeness within each participant ’ s respective organization .
Low Ethnic Dissimilarity High Ethnic Dissimilarity Mgmt .
Ethnic Representativeness Perceived Behavioral Integrity Ethnic Discrimination Mgmt .
Ethnic Representativeness Perceived Behavioral Integrity Ethnic Discrimination .11** -.21 -.51* .15** -.29** -.95** Figure 3 .
The interactive effects of management ethnic representative- ness and ethnic dissimilarity on perceived behavioral integrity and ethnic discrimination—Study 2. p .05. p .01 .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1556 LINDSEY , AVERY , DAWSON , AND KING Management ethnic representativeness ( subjective ) .
To measure subjective management ethnic representativeness , we used three items designed to capture participant ’ s perceptions of representa- tiveness in management ( sample item : “ Top management in my organization includes about the same percentages of people of different racial backgrounds as the rest of the workforce in my organization ” ) .
To develop this scale , we simply broke apart the triple-barrelled item ( “ Top management in my organization in- cludes about the same percentages of people of different racial , ethnic , and national backgrounds as the rest of the workforce in my organization ” ) used to represent this construct in Study 2 into three separate items focusing on racial , ethnic , and national back- grounds , respectively .
A principal axis factor analysis with promax rotation revealed that one factor ( eigenvalue 2.69 ) accounted for 89.73 % of the variance .
Factor loadings for all three items were greater than .88 .
Thus , a composite of all three items was created ( .96 ) .
The response scale for this measure ranged from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 7 ( strongly agree ) .
Ethnic dissimilarity ( objective ) .
To measure objective ethnic dissimilarity as similarly as possible to Study 1 , we first asked participants to estimate the percentage of others in their organiza- tion who were from the following ethnic groups : ( a ) African American/Black ; ( b ) Asian , Asian American/Pacific Islander ; ( c ) Caucasian/White American , European , not Hispanic ; ( d ) Chi- cano ( a ) /Mexican American , Latino ( a ) /Hispanic American ; ( e ) Na- tive American/American Indian ; ( f ) Mixed ; parents are from two different groups , or ( g ) Other .
We then used each participant ’ s own ethnic group ( which was measured using the same categories ) and the Euclidian distance formula , as recommended by Harrison and Klein ( 2007 ) , to capture the extent to which each individual was dissimilar in ethnic background to all other individuals in their organization .
This metric was calculated such that a higher score means that the individual shares his or her ethnic background with a smaller proportion of colleagues .
Ethnic dissimilarity ( subjective ) .
To maximize consistency with our previous studies , we combined and reverse-coded re- sponses inquiring about the ethnic similarity of participants ’ su- pervisor ( “ Is your supervisor or manager of the same racial or ethnic background as you ? ” ) and coworkers ( “ About what percent- age of your coworkers are of people from your racial , ethnic , or national background ? ” ) , just as we did in Study 2 .
Because the responses to these items involved different formats , we standard- ized each before aggregating them to form an indicator with higher scores indicating greater dissimilarity .
Perceived behavioral integrity .
To measure perceived be- havioral integrity , we used a five-item scale that included edited versions of both items used to measure this construct in Study 2 in addition to three newly created items such as “ Managers in my organization demonstrate high integrity. ” To develop this scale , we modeled our new items off of those used in Study 2 while seeking to expand coverage of the construct and solve issues with the previously used items such as double-barreling and referring to multiple sources of integrity ( e.g. , we split the previously used item “ Managers in my organization behave honestly and ethically when dealing with employees and clients or customers ” into two items reflecting behaving honestly and ethically , respectively , while focusing these items only on how supervisors interact with employees ) .
A principal axis factor analysis with promax rotation revealed that one factor ( eigenvalue 4.13 ) accounted for 82.58 % of the variance .
Factor loadings for all five items were greater than .83 .
Thus , a composite of all the items was created ( .94 ) .
The response scale for this measure ranged from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 7 ( strongly agree ) .
Interpersonal mistreatment .
To measure interpersonal mis- treatment as broadly as possible , and to capture the extent of this mistreatment in a way that was inclusive of our previous two studies , we created an eight-item scale designed to capture expe- riences of physical violence , harassment , bullying , abuse , discrim- ination , incivility , and unfair treatment at work ( sample item : “ In the last 12 months , to what extent have you personally experienced unfair treatment at work from your supervisors ? ” ) .
To develop this scale , we modeled our new items off of those used in Study 1 , while correcting issues associated with these items such as being double-barreled or referring to multiple sources of mistreatment ( e.g. , supervisors and coworkers ) .
Notably , the shell of each item ( i.e. , “ In the last 12 months , to what extent have you personally experienced X at work from your supervisors ? ” ) remained the same across the scale , and we simply edited the behavior encoun- tered in each item to reflect experiences of physical violence , harassment , bullying , abuse , discrimination , mistreatment , incivil- ity , and unfair treatment .
A principal axis factor analysis with promax rotation revealed that one factor ( eigenvalue 6.16 ) accounted for 76.96 % of the variance .
Factor loadings for all eight items were greater than .88 .
Thus , a composite of all the items was created ( .96 ) .
The response scale ranged from 1 ( to no extent ) to 5 ( to a very large extent ) .
Control variables .
As in Studies 1 and 2 , we used data concerning employee ethnicity , gender , age , and tenure as control variables .
Study 3 : Results The means , standard deviations , and correlations for all vari- ables are located in Table 5 .
Hypothesis 1 , which predicted a negative relationship between management ethnic representative- ness and interpersonal mistreatment , was tested using multiple regression analysis .
After accounting for the effects of our control variables , objective representativeness had an insignificant rela- tionship with interpersonal mistreatment ( b .39 , SE .43 , p .37 ) , whereas subjective representativeness had a positive relation- ship with interpersonal mistreatment ( b .09 , SE .03 , p .01 ) , such that higher levels of subjective representativeness were asso- ciated with higher levels of interpersonal mistreatment .
Thus , Hypothesis 1 was not supported in this study .
Hypothesis 2 proposed that ethnic dissimilarity moderates the representativeness-mistreatment relationship such that it is more pronounced among employees who are more dissimilar to their workplace counterparts .
We tested this hypothesis using hierarchi- cal regression analysis .
This analysis revealed that none of the dissimilarity ( objective or subjective ) by representativeness ( ob- jective or subjective ) interaction terms were significant ( all ps .06 ) .
Consequently , Hypothesis 2 was not supported in this study .
We used SPSS and Mplus applications introduced by Hayes ( 2013 ) and Edwards and Lambert ( 2007 ) to compute bootstrapped confidence intervals for our simple and moderated mediation anal- yses .
One reason we may have failed to detect the main effects proposed in Hypothesis 1 and the interaction effects proposed in Hypothesis 2 is that they may function indirectly .
Indeed , Hypoth- T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1557MANAGEMENT ETHNIC REPRESENTATIVENESS esis 3 predicted an indirect effect of management ethnic represen- tativeness on interpersonal mistreatment through perceived behav- ioral integrity .
Hypothesis 4 predicted that ethnic dissimilarity between an individual and others in the workplace moderates this indirect relationship such that the linkage between representative- ness and mistreatment is significantly stronger when employees are more dissimilar .
In testing Hypothesis 3 , we computed bootstrapped confidence intervals for the indirect effect linking objective representativeness and mistreatment through subjective representativeness ( the first mediator in the series ) and perceived behavioral integrity ( the second mediator in the series ) .
Although the direct effect is insig- nificant in the presence of the mediators and control variables ( b .15 , SE .43 , p .73 ) , the indirect effect was statistically significant ( b .17 , SE .07 , 95 % CI .36 to .07 ) .
This effect captures the significant positive effect of objective repre- sentativeness on subjective representativeness ( b 3.87 , SE .81 , p .01 ) , which supports Hypothesis 5 , which in turn had a significant positive effect on perceived behavioral integrity ( b .25 , SE .05 , p .01 ) , which in turn had a significant negative effect on interpersonal mistreatment ( b .18 , SE .05 , p .01 ) .
This pattern ( which some would refer to as full mediation ) supports Hypothesis 3 via the significant indirect effect and all individual paths estimated in the anticipated direction .
Turning to Hypothesis 4 , we conducted what amounts to mod- erated path analysis to determine whether our serial indirect effect from Hypothesis 3 was moderated by objective or subjective dissimilarity ( Edwards & Lambert , 2007 ) .
Perhaps because of multicollinearity and/or our relatively low sample size as com- pared to Studies 1 and 2 , we did not find evidence that the serial mediation effect we found in support of Hypothesis 3 varied significantly across levels of objective or subjective dissimilarity .
Seeking to demonstrate the robustness of our findings from Studies 1 and 2 , we followed up on this analysis with more exploratory analyses based on simpler moderated mediation models .
Specifi- cally , we found that the simple indirect effect of objective man- agement ethnic representativeness on interpersonal mistreatment via perceived behavioral integrity varied across levels of objective ethnic dissimilarity , such that this indirect effect was significantly negative for those high on objective dissimilarity ( b .22 , SE .14 , 95 % CI .59 to .02 ) , but significantly positive for those lower on ethnic dissimilarity ( b .36 , SE .22 , 95 % CI .05 to .93 ) .
The difference between these conditional indirect effects was also significant ( difference .80 , SE .41 , 95 % CI 1.86 to .21 ) .
Notably , this finding replicates our reverse discrimina- tion finding from Study 1 by showing that individuals who are low on objective ethnic dissimilarity may actually perceive more mis- treatment when objective management ethnic representativeness is high .
In addition , we found contrasting results for the simple indirect effect of subjective management ethnic representativeness on interpersonal mistreatment via perceived behavioral integrity across levels of subjective ethnic dissimilarity , such that this indirect effect was significantly negative for those high on subjec- tive ethnic dissimilarity ( b .04 , SE .02 , 95 % CI .09 to .02 ) , but not significant for those who were low on subjective ethnic dissimilarity ( b .02 , SE .02 , 95 % CI .06 to .001 ) .
However , the difference between these two indirect effects was not statistically significant ( difference .01 , SE .01 , 95 % CI .03 to .01 ) .
Collectively , these results provide mild support for Hypothesis 4 in this study .
Study 3 : Discussion The results of this data collection complement , corroborate , and extend the findings of our previous studies .
Building on the find- ings that ethnic similarity moderates , and perceived behavioral integrity mediates , the relationship between management represen- tativeness and interpersonal mistreatment , we sought to replicate these findings in Study 3 while measuring our independent and dependent variables at different time points , using multi-item measures for all variables of interest , and using both objective and subjective measurement strategies for our variables related to representativeness and dissimilarity .
Results again supported Hy- pothesis 3 , which predicted that perceived behavioral integrity would mediate the relationship between management ethnic rep- resentativeness and interpersonal mistreatment at work .
In addi- tion , we extended this analysis to include subjective representa- tiveness as a more proximal mediator in the process by which objective representativeness has its impact on perceived behavioral integrity and , in turn , interpersonal mistreatment in the workplace .
Testing this mediation series provided evidence for full mediation , indicating that it may be important to consider both objective and subjective metrics of representativeness when conducting future studies on this phenomenon .
Results also provided some support Table 5 Means , Standard Deviations , and Correlations for Study 3 Variable M SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 .
Representativeness ( objective ) .82 .15 2 .
Representativeness ( subjective ) 4.10 1.74 .33 3 .
Dissimilarity ( objective ) .60 .35 .41 .01 4 .
Dissimilarity ( subjective ) .0 1.10 .09 .03 .04 5 .
Perceived behavioral integrity 5.11 1.29 .01 .20 .05 .05 6 .
Interpersonal mistreatment 1.64 .91 .05 .20 .24 .05 .22 7 .
Gender .55 .50 .02 .15 .03 .03 .11 .11 8 .
Ethnicity .61 .49 .00 .10 .36 .01 .02 .24 .16 9 .
Tenure 5.81 5.70 .14 .08 .16 .04 .12 .14 .03 .07 — 10 .
Age 34.83 11.09 .07 .03 .24 .07 .13 .27 .01 .26 .41 Note .
Gender is coded 1 male and 0 female .
Ethnicity is coded 1 White and 2 minority .
p .05. p .01 .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1558 LINDSEY , AVERY , DAWSON , AND KING for Hypothesis 4 , which predicted that the indirect effect proposed in Hypothesis 3 would be stronger for ethnically dissimilar em- ployees when compared with those who are more ethnically sim- ilar to others in their workplace .
Interestingly , we observed stron- ger moderated mediation effects when management ethnic representativeness and ethnic dissimilarity were measured objec- tively ( as opposed to subjectively ) .
Although our short time lag in this study likely helped to reduce common method bias , it is important to note that our method here does not rule out the possibility of reverse causation .
Indeed , it may be the case that experiences of interpersonal mistreatment caused decreases in perceptions of behavioral integrity or repre- sentativeness , rather than the opposite causal ordering stipulated by our theoretical model .
Finally , a limitation of Study 3 is that although we attempted to measure representativeness and dissim- ilarity using both objective and subjective strategies , these vari- ables remain perceptual in nature .
Although we acknowledge that this is less than ideal , we would also point out that our measures of objective and subjective representativeness ( r .33 ) and ob- jective and subjective dissimilarity ( r .03 ) were ( a ) not strongly related to one another and ( b ) have differing relationships with our outcomes of interest ( see Table 5 ) .
Thus , we are confident that although these variables are perceptual in nature , they appear to have at the very least captured different aspects of our variables of interest .
General Discussion We conducted three complementary studies to investigate the relationship between management ethnic representativeness and interpersonal mistreatment at work .
Results support our conceptual model : Management ethnic representation is negatively related to interpersonal mistreatment through the mediating mechanism of perceived behavioral integrity , with effects being stronger for ethnically dissimilar individuals when compared with those who are more ethnically similar to others in their organization .
Theoretical Implications Theoretically speaking , this work emphasizes the value of sig- naling theory to explain why and for whom signals from an organization may have an impact on individuals currently working within an organization .
This is an important departure from pre- vious uses of signaling theory that tend to focus solely on organi- zational outsiders as receivers of organizational signals ( Connelly et al. , 2011 ) .
In our view , researchers seeking to use signaling theory to explain reactions from current employees might actually observe stronger effects when compared with the effects of similar signals on organizational outsiders .
We make this assertion be- cause of the signaling theory concepts of signal observability and signal frequency discussed earlier .
Recall that research has shown that ( a ) more visible signals are more effective ( Miller & del Carmen Triana , 2009 ) , and ( b ) increasing signal frequency im- proves the likelihood that a signal will be interpreted correctly ( Filatotchev & Bishop , 2002 ) .
Thus , it stands to reason that current employees , by virtue of being in the workplace every day , may be more likely to observe a signal and interpret it correctly due to the relatively high signal frequency , making them more likely to incorporate these signals into their sense-making processes .
This assertion also indicates that employees who telecommute or are not physically present in the workplace as frequently may not be as affected by organizational signals when compared with more tra- ditional employees .
Our work is also a critical departure from traditional views of relational demography , which typically focus on whether supervisor–subordinate or coworker pairs share demographic char- acteristics ( e.g. , Avery et al. , 2008 ) .
Indeed , by shifting our per- spective to the management ethnic representativeness in the orga- nization as a whole , our work shows that ethnically dissimilar others attend to the demographic makeup of managers throughout the organization as opposed to focusing solely on their own su- pervisor .
We argued in the introduction that management ethnic representativeness of managers may serve as a particularly pow- erful signal to employees within the organization due to their relatively high status in those organizations .
This argument was supported by our findings , indicating that when examining rela- tional demography , it is important not only to consider represen- tativeness within the organization as a whole , but also to consider the level and relative status of representativeness in predicting interpersonal mistreatment at work .
Overall , our model and findings suggest that employees , espe- cially employees ethnically dissimilar from others in the organi- zation , interpret signals from their organizations through the lens of representativeness .
Specifically , this article supports the value of examining interpersonal mistreatment as an outcome of interest as opposed to focusing solely on discrimination in the workplace .
Following Devine ’ s ( 1989 ) seminal work on the manifestations of bias beyond one ’ s conscious control , several authors have argued and supported the notion that modern discrimination manifests itself in numerous forms that vary in terms of their subtlety and severity ( e.g. , Brief et al. , 2000 ; Jones et al. , 2016 ; Swim et al. , 2004 ) .
Despite these advances , many research studies still focus solely on overt discrimination rather than examining interpersonal mistreatment in a more holistic manner .
Importantly , by demon- strating similar effects when examining both interpersonal mis- treatment and ethnic discrimination as outcome variables across three separate samples , our work indicates that researchers may want to expand the construct space when examining discrimination to include other forms of mistreatment such as harassment , bully- ing , and abuse .
Finally , our work supports the notion that perceived behavioral integrity is an explanatory mechanism that helps account for the relationship between management ethnic representativeness and interpersonal mistreatment at work .
This finding highlights the importance of appearing authentic when presenting incumbent employees with equal opportunity initiatives .
Indeed , previous research has indicated that in addition to numeric representation , organizations must portray an authentic commitment to diversity that exceeds superficial attempts to truly develop a reputation for valuing diversity ( e.g. , Smith , Morgan , King , Knight , & Hebl , 2012 ) .
Our work supports the idea that having management be highly representative of the organization as a whole may be a way to communicate equal opportunity for all incumbent employees , which could then serve to curb experiences of mistreatment in the workplace .
However , it is important to note that an organization must also have some baseline of heterogeneity with regard to the ethnicity of their employees in order for management ethnic rep- resentativeness to signal that the organization genuinely values T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1559MANAGEMENT ETHNIC REPRESENTATIVENESS diverse perspectives .
Indeed , if an organization consists of only White employees , that organization could have perfect management ethnic representativeness ( thus communicating equal opportunities for incumbent employees ) while also communicating that they do not value a diversity of perspectives whatsoever .
In addition , our Study 3 findings support the notion that subjective perceptions of representa- tiveness may serve as a more proximal explanatory mechanism by which objective representativeness has its impact on perceived be- havioral integrity and , in turn , on interpersonal mistreatment .
These findings speak to the theoretical importance of considering both objective and subjective indicators of management ethnic representa- tiveness and ethnic dissimilarity in future work .
Practical Implications Practically speaking , our work provides organizational leaders with a ( somewhat ) controllable variable to focus on—management ethnic representativeness—when seeking to reduce experiences of mistreatment within their organizations .
Notably , most organiza- tions likely already have the data they need to calculate this focal construct .
Perhaps the most important practical contribution of our work is showing that incumbent employees look beyond simple diversity aggregates to management ethnic representativeness across organizational levels for cues about the quality of their employers .
Indeed , we argued in the introduction that representa- tiveness in management may be a particularly salient signal for ethnically dissimilar employees , and this assertion was confirmed by findings from our studies .
Thus , management ethnic represen- tativeness appears to have significant symbolic value to employ- ees , especially employees ethnically dissimilar from others in the organization , indicating that organizations should proactively man- age this variable to ensure they are sending desired signals to their employees .
One way this can be accomplished is by using career development , training , and mentoring programs to ( a ) identify and develop qualified ethnically dissimilar employees for management positions and ( b ) ensure that the pathways to advancement for all employees are clear ( see Lindsey , King , McCausland , Jones , & Dunleavy , 2013 ) .
Finally , our work provides proximal indicators of interpersonal mistreatment in the form of our perceived behav- ioral integrity and subjective perceptions of representativeness mediators , meaning that organizations could measure these vari- ables and attempt to take corrective action before perceptions of integrity and representativeness potentially engender experiences of mistreatment later in time .
Limitations and Future Research Directions These compelling findings should be interpreted in light of the studies ’ limitations .
One limitation is our reliance on dichotomous outcomes ( in the first two studies ) to account for experiences of mistreatment and discrimination in the workplace .
Concerns sur- rounding this limitation , however , should be somewhat assuaged by the fact that we observed similar effects across the two studies and a third involving a continuous measure .
Another limitation of these studies is our reliance on single-source , self-report data for our outcomes and mediators of interest .
However , we would note that self-report measures are likely the most reliable and accurate way to measure perceived behavioral integrity and interpersonal mistreatment .
In addition , the fact that we observed similar effects of our objective predictors ( i.e. , ethnic management representa- tiveness and ethnic dissimilarity ) on these perceptual variables across different samples should serve to alleviate concerns sur- rounding this limitation .
This work presents several avenues for future research endeav- ors .
First , our concept of management ethnic representativeness could be applied to other stigmatized groups in organizations .
For instance , does management gender representativeness have similar effects on underrepresented women in the workplace ?
Does man- agement age representativeness have similar effects on underrep- resented older or younger workers ?
Second , future work could examine other mediators in the process by which management representativeness impacts interpersonal mistreatment in the work- place .
We believe that justice perceptions , trust in management , and diversity climate are excellent candidates to be included in future mediation models .
Third , future research could consider the interactive effects between management representativeness and relational demography in predicting organizational outcomes .
For instance , does one ’ s level of representativeness within their com- munity moderate the relationship between management represen- tativeness and interpersonal mistreatment at work ?
Fourth , addi- tional work should examine the degree to which management ethnic representativeness interacts with other diversity initiatives ( e.g. , diversity training programs , inclusion policies ) in predicting diversity-related outcomes .
For example , can a strong diversity training program curb mistreatment experiences when manage- ment ethnic representativeness is lacking ?
Finally , given that pre- vious research has shown that relational demography can influence performance outcomes ( Avery et al. , 2012 ; King et al. , 2011 ) , a natural direction for future research is to expand on the outcomes we have addressed here to include employee and organizational performance .
In our view , this could be a powerful way to dem- onstrate the bottom line effect of having management ethnic rep- resentativeness in one ’ s organization .
Conclusion Overall , our findings confirm that misalignments in the demo- graphic representation of managers can send problematic signals about interpersonal interactions to minority employees .
We have made an important theoretical contribution by showing that sig- naling theory can be used to explain phenomena occurring within organizations as opposed to focusing solely on external stake- holder .
Finally , we have made an important practical contribution by showing that organizations should strive for representativeness in their management positions if they hope to maximize percep- tions of behavioral integrity , thereby minimizing experiences of mistreatment for ethnically dissimilar individuals in the workplace .
References Asgari , S. , Dasgupta , N. , & Stout , J. G. ( 2012 ) .
When do counterstereo- typic ingroup members inspire versus deflate ?
The effect of successful professional women on young women ’ s leadership self-concept .
Per- sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 38 , 370–383 .
http : //dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/0146167211431968 Avery , D. R. , Mckay , P. F. , Tonidandel , S. , Volpone , S. D. , & Morris , M. A .
( 2012 ) .
Is there method to the madness ?
Examining how racio- ethnic matching influences retail store productivity .
Personnel Psychol- ogy , 65 , 167–199 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2011.01241.x T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1560 LINDSEY , AVERY , DAWSON , AND KING Avery , D. R. , McKay , P. F. , & Wilson , D. C. ( 2008 ) .
What are the odds ?
How demographic similarity affects the prevalence of perceived em- ployment discrimination .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 93 , 235–249 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.93.2.235 Berdahl , J. L. ( 2007 ) .
Harassment based on sex : Protecting social status in the context of gender hierarchy .
The Academy of Management Review , 32 , 641–658 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.5465/AMR.2007.24351879 Bond , J. T. , Thompson , C. , Galinsky , E. , & Prottas , D. ( 2003 ) .
The 2002 national study of the changing workforce .
New York , NY : Families and Work Institute .
Brief , A. P. , Dietz , J. , Cohen , R. R. , Pugh , S. D. , & Vaslow , J .
B .
( 2000 ) .
Just doing business : Modern racism and obedience to authority as explanations for employment discrimination .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 81 , 72–97 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1006/ obhd.1999.2867 Brown , M. E. , & Treviño , L. K. ( 2006 ) .
Ethical leadership : A review and future directions .
The Leadership Quarterly , 17 , 595–616 .
http : //dx.doi .org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2006.10.004 Certo , S. T. ( 2003 ) .
Influencing initial public offering investors with prestige : Signaling with board structures .
Academy of Management Review , 28 , 432–446 .
Certo , S. T. , Daily , C. M. , & Dalton , D. R. ( 2001 ) .
Signaling firm value through board structure : An investigation of initial public offerings .
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 26 , 33–50 .
Chen , G. , Bliese , P. D. , & Mathieu , J. E. ( 2005 ) .
Conceptual framework and statistical procedures for delineating and testing multilevel theories of homology .
Organizational Research Methods , 8 , 375–409 .
http : //dx .doi.org/10.1177/1094428105280056 Connelly , B. L. , Certo , S. T. , Ireland , R. D. , & Reutzel , C. R. ( 2011 ) .
Signaling theory : A review and assessment .
Journal of Management , 37 , 39–67 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/0149206310388419 Dawson , J. F. ( 2014 ) .
Moderation in management research : What , why , when and how .
Journal of Business and Psychology , 29 , 1–19 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10869-013-9308-7 Devine , P. G. ( 1989 ) .
Stereotypes and prejudice : Their automatic and controlled components .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 56 , 5–18 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.56.1.5 Durcikova , A. , & Gray , P. ( 2009 ) .
How knowledge validation processes affect knowledge contribution .
Journal of Management Information Systems , 25 , 81–108 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222250403 Edwards , J. R. , & Lambert , L. S. ( 2007 ) .
Methods for integrating moder- ation and mediation : A general analytical framework using moderated path analysis .
Psychological Methods , 12 , 1–22 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .1037/1082-989X.12.1.1 Ely , R. J. , & Thomas , D. A .
( 2001 ) .
Cultural diversity at work : The effects of diversity perspectives on workgroup processes and outcomes .
Admin- istrative Science Quarterly , 46 , 229–273 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.2307/ 2667087 Filatotchev , I. , & Bishop , K. ( 2002 ) .
Board composition , share ownership , and “ underpricing ” of U. K. IPO firms .
Strategic Management Journal , 23 , 941–955 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1002/smj.269 Fiske , S. T. , & Taylor , S. E. ( 1991 ) .
Social cognition ( 2nd ed . ) .
New York , NY : McGraw-Hill .
Foley , S. , Linnehan , F. , Greenhaus , J. H. , & Weer , C. H. ( 2006 ) .
The impact of gender similarity , racial similarity , and work culture on family-supportive supervision .
Group & Organization Management , 31 , 420–441 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/1059601106286884 Gulati , R. , & Higgins , M. C. ( 2003 ) .
Which ties matter when ?
The contingent effects of interorganizational partnerships on IPO success .
Strategic Management Journal , 24 , 127–144 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1002/ smj.287 Haddock , C. K. , Rindskopf , D. , & Shadish , W. R. ( 1998 ) .
Using odds ratios as effect sizes for meta-analysis of dichotomous data : A primer on methods and issues .
Psychological Methods , 3 , 339–353 .
http : //dx.doi .org/10.1037/1082-989X.3.3.339 Harrison , D. A. , & Klein , K. J .
( 2007 ) .
What ’ s the difference ?
Diversity constructs as separation , variety , or disparity in organizations .
The Academy of Management Review , 32 , 1199–1228 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .5465/AMR.2007.26586096 Hayes , A. F. ( 2013 ) .
Introduction to mediation , moderation , and condi- tional process analysis : A regression-based approach .
New York , NY : Guilford Press .
Health and Social Care Information Centre .
( 2011 ) .
NHS Staff—2000– 2010 , Overview .
Retrieved from http : //www.hscic.gov.uk/catalogue/ PUB02041/nhs-staf-over-2000-2010-pra.pdf Heilman , M. E. ( 2001 ) .
Description and prescription : How gender stereo- types prevent women ’ s ascent up the organizational ladder .
Journal of Social Issues , 57 , 657–674 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/0022-4537.00234 Highhouse , S. , Thornbury , E. E. , & Little , I. S. ( 2007 ) .
Social-identity functions of attraction to organizations .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 103 , 134–146 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j .obhdp.2006.01.001 Jackson , S. E. , Stone , V. K. , & Alvarez , E. B .
( 1993 ) .
Socialization amidst diversity : The impact of demographics on work team oldtimers and newcomers .
In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw ( Eds .
) , Research in organizational behavior ( Vol .
16 , pp .
45–109 ) .
Greenwich , CT : JAI Press .
Janney , J. J. , & Folta , T. B .
( 2003 ) .
Signaling through private equity placements and its impact on the valuation of biotechnology firms .
Journal of Business Venturing , 18 , 361–380 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/ S0883-9026 ( 02 ) 00100-3 Jones , K. P. , Peddie , C. I. , Gilrane , V. L. , King , E. B. , & Gray , A. L. ( 2013 ) .
Not so subtle a meta-analytic investigation of the correlates of subtle and overt discrimination .
Journal of Management , 42 , 1588– 1613. http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/0149206313506466 Kanter , R. M. ( 1977 ) .
Men and women of the corporation .
New York , NY : Basic Books .
King , E. B. , Dawson , J. F. , West , M. A. , Gilrane , V. L. , Peddie , C. I. , & Bastin , L. ( 2011 ) .
Why organizational and community diversity matter : Representativeness and the emergence of incivility and organizational performance .
Academy of Management Journal , 54 , 1103–1118 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.5465/amj.2010.0016 King , E. B. , Hebl , M. R. , George , J. M. , & Matusik , S. F. ( 2010 ) .
Understanding tokenism : Antecedents and consequences of a psycho- logical climate of gender inequity .
Journal of Management , 36 , 482– 510. http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/0149206308328508 Latu , I. M. , Mast , M. S. , Lammers , J. , & Bombari , D. ( 2013 ) .
Successful female leaders empower women ’ s behavior in leadership tasks .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 49 , 444–448 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .1016/j.jesp.2013.01.003 Lee , P. ( 2001 ) .
What ’ s in a name .
com ?
The effects of “ .com ” name changes on stock prices and trading activity .
Strategic Management Journal , 22 , 793–804 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1002/smj.177 Leslie , L. M. ( 2014 ) .
A status-based multilevel model of ethnic diversity and work unit performance .
Journal of Management , 43 , 426–454 .
Lester , R. H. , Certo , S. T. , Dalton , C. M. , Dalton , D. R. , & Cannella , A .
A .
( 2006 ) .
Initial public offering investor valuations : An examination of top management team prestige and environmental uncertainty .
Journal of Small Business Management , 44 , 1–26 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/j .1540-627X.2006.00151.x Lim , S. , & Cortina , L. M. ( 2005 ) .
Interpersonal mistreatment in the workplace : The interface and impact of general incivility and sexual harassment .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 90 , 483–496 .
http : //dx.doi .org/10.1037/0021-9010.90.3.483 Lindsey , A. , King , E. , McCausland , T. , Jones , K. , & Dunleavy , E. ( 2013 ) .
What we know and don ’ t : Eradicating employment discrimination 50 years after the Civil Rights Act .
Industrial and Organizational Psychol- T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1561MANAGEMENT ETHNIC REPRESENTATIVENESS ogy : Perspectives on Science and Practice , 6 , 391–413 .
http : //dx.doi .org/10.1111/iops.12075 Lyness , K. S. , & Heilman , M. E. ( 2006 ) .
When fit is fundamental : Perfor- mance evaluations and promotions of upper-level female and male managers .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 91 , 777–785 .
http : //dx.doi .org/10.1037/0021-9010.91.4.777 Major , B. , & Sawyer , P. J .
( 2009 ) .
Attributions to discrimination : Ante- cedents and consequences .
In T. D. Nelson ( Ed .
) , Handbook of preju- dice , stereotyping , and discrimination ( pp .
89–110 ) .
Philadelphia , PA : Taylor & Francis .
McGuire , J .
( 1984 ) .
Search for the self : Going beyond self-esteem and the reactive self .
In R. A. Zucker , J. Aronoff , & A. I. Rabin ( Eds .
) , Person- ality and the prediction of behaviour ( pp .
73–120 ) .
New York , NY : Academic Press .
McKay , P. F. , & Avery , D. R. ( 2006 ) .
What has race got to do with it ?
Unraveling the role of racioethnicity in job seekers ’ reactions to site visits .
Personnel Psychology , 59 , 395–429 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/j .1744-6570.2006.00079.x McKay , P. F. , Avery , D. R. , & Morris , M. A .
( 2008 ) .
Mean racial-ethnic differences in employee sales performance : The moderating role of diversity climate .
Personnel Psychology , 61 , 349–374 .
http : //dx.doi.org/ 10.1111/j.1744-6570.2008.00116.x Miller , T. , & del Carmen Triana , M. ( 2009 ) .
Demographic diversity in the boardroom : Mediators of the board diversity–firm performance relation- ship .
Journal of Management Studies , 46 , 755–786 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .1111/j.1467-6486.2009.00839.x Pelled , L. H. , Ledford , G. E. , & Mohrmon , S. A .
( 1999 ) .
Demographic dissimilarity and workplace inclusion .
Journal of Management Studies , 36 , 1013–1031 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-6486.00168 Perkins , S. J. , & Hendry , C. ( 2005 ) .
Ordering top pay : Interpreting the signals .
Journal of Management Studies , 42 , 1443–1468 .
http : //dx.doi .org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2005.00550.x Prottas , D. J .
( 2013 ) .
Relationships among employee perception of their manager ’ s behavioral integrity , moral distress , and employee attitudes and well-being .
Journal of Business Ethics , 113 , 51–60 .
http : //dx.doi .org/10.1007/s10551-012-1280-z Pugh , S. D. , Dietz , J. , Brief , A. P. , & Wiley , J. W. ( 2008 ) .
Looking inside and out : The impact of employee and community demographic compo- sition on organizational diversity climate .
Journal of Applied Psychol- ogy , 93 , 1422–1428 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0012696 Ring , P. S. , & Van de Ven , A. H. ( 1989 ) .
Formal and informal dimensions of transactions .
In A. H. Van de Ven , H. L. Angle , & M. S. Poole ( Eds .
) , Research on the management of innovation : The Minnesota studies ( pp .
171–192 ) .
New York , NY : Ballinger .
Roberson , Q. M. , & Stevens , C. K. ( 2006 ) .
Making sense of diversity in the workplace : Organizational justice and language abstraction in employ- ees ’ accounts of diversity-related incidents .
Journal of Applied Psychol- ogy , 91 , 379–391 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.91.2.379 Rynes , S. L. ( 1991 ) .
Recruitment , job choice , and post-hire consequences : A call for new research directions .
In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Howe ( Eds .
) , Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology ( pp .
399– 444 ) .
Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press .
Simons , T. ( 2002 ) .
Behavioral integrity : The perceived alignment between managers ’ words and deeds as a research focus .
Organization Science , 13 , 18–35 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1287/orsc.13.1.18.543 Simons , T. , Friedman , R. , Liu , L. A. , & McLean Parks , J .
( 2007 ) .
Racial differences in sensitivity to behavioral integrity : Attitudinal conse- quences , in-group effects , and “ trickle down ” among Black and non- Black employees .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 92 , 650–665 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.92.3.650 Simpson , B. , & Walker , H. A .
( 2002 ) .
Status characteristics and perfor- mance expectations : A reformulation .
Sociological Theory , 20 , 24–40 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-9558.00149 Smith , A. N. , Morgan , W. B. , King , E. B. , Hebl , M. R. , & Peddie , C. I .
( 2012 ) .
The ins and outs of diversity management : The effect of authen- ticity on outsider perceptions and insider behaviors .
Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 42 ( S1 ) , E21–E55 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1559- 1816.2012.01021.x Spence , M. ( 2002 ) .
Signaling in retrospect and the informational structure of markets .
The American Economic Review , 92 , 434–459 .
http : //dx.doi .org/10.1257/00028280260136200 Srivastava , J .
( 2001 ) .
The role of inferences in sequential bargaining with one-sided incomplete information : Some experimental evidence .
Orga- nizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 85 , 166–187 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1006/obhd.2000.2936 Swim , J. K. , Mallett , R. , & Stangor , C. ( 2004 ) .
Understanding subtle sexism : Detection and use of sexist language .
Sex Roles , 51 , 117–128 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1023/B : SERS.0000037757.73192.06 Tajfel , H. , & Turner , J. C. ( 1986 ) .
The social identity theory of intergroup behavior .
In S. Worchel & W. G. Austin ( Eds .
) , Psychology of inter- group relations ( 2nd ed. , pp .
7–24 ) .
Chicago : Nelson-Hall .
Thomas , D. A .
( 1999 ) .
Beyond the simple demography-power hypothesis : How blacks in power influence white-mentor black-protégé develop- mental relationships .
In A. J. Murrell , F. J. Crosby , & R. J. Ely ( Eds .
) , Mentoring dilemmas : Developmental relationships within multicultural organizations ( pp .
157–170 ) .
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum .
Tsui , A. S. , & Gutek , B .
A .
( 1999 ) .
Demographic differences in organizations : Current research and future directions .
Lanham , MD : Lexington Books .
Tsui , A. S. , & O ’ Reilly , C. A. , III .
( 1989 ) .
Beyond simple demographic effects : The importance of relational demography in superior– subordinate dyads .
Academy of Management Journal , 32 , 402–423 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.2307/256368 van der Walt , N. , & Ingley , C. ( 2003 ) .
Board dynamics and the influence of professional background , gender and racial diversity of directors .
Corporate Governance , 11 , 218–234 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467- 8683.00320 Walsh , J. P. , & Ungson , G. R. ( 1991 ) .
Organizational memory .
Academy of Management Review , 16 , 57–91 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.5465/AMR.1991 .4278992 Weick , K. E. ( 1979 ) .
The social psychology of organization .
Reading , MA : Addison Wesley .
Weick , K. E. ( 1995 ) .
Sensemaking in organizations .
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .
Westphal , J. D. , & Zajac , E. J .
( 2001 ) .
Decoupling policy from practice : The case of stock repurchase programs .
Administrative Science Quar- terly , 46 , 202–228 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.2307/2667086 Zahavi , A. , & Zahavi , A .
( 1997 ) .
The handicap principle : A missing piece of Darwin ’ s puzzle .
Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1562 LINDSEY , AVERY , DAWSON , AND KING Appendix Data Transparency Statement The data reported in this article were obtained from publicly available data from the National Health Service National Staff Survey from 2009 ( http : //discover.ukdataservice.ac.uk/catalogue/ ? sn657 0 & typeData % 20catalogue # publications ) and 2010 ( https : //discover .ukdataservice.ac.uk/Catalogue/ ? sn6957 & typeData % 20catalogue ) .
A bibliography of journal articles , working papers , conference presenta- tions , and dissertations using the National Health Service National Staff Survey is available via the previous links .
The data reported in this manuscript were also obtained from the 2002 National Study of the Changing Workforce ( Bond , Thompson , Galinsky , & Prottas , 2003 ; http : //www.whenworkworks.org/be-effective/resources/national-study-of- the-changing-workforce ) .
The variables and relationships examined in the present article have not been examined in any previous or current articles , or to the best of our knowledge in any papers that will be under review soon .
Received November 9 , 2015 Revision received April 24 , 2017 Accepted April 24 , 2017 New Editors Appointed , 2019–2024 The Publications and Communications Board of the American Psychological Association an- nounces the appointment of 11 new editors for 6-year terms beginning in 2019 .
As of January 1 , 2018 , new manuscripts should be directed as follows : ● Clinician ’ s Research Digest : Adult Populations and Clinician ’ s Research Digest : Child and Adolescent Populations ( http : //www.apa.org/pubs/journals/crd/ and http : //www.apa.org/ pubs/journals/crp/ ) , Marisol Perez , PhD , Arizona State University ● Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition ( http : //www.apa .
org/pubs/journals/xlm/ ) , Aaron S. Benjamin , PhD , University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign ● Journal of Neuroscience , Psychology , and Economics ( http : //www.apa.org/pubs/journals/ npe/ ) , Samuel M. McClure , PhD , Arizona State University ● Journal of Threat Assessment and Management ( http : //www.apa.org/pubs/journals/tam/ ) , Laura S. Guy , PhD , Protect International Risk and Safety Services Inc. , Vancouver , BC , Canada ● Professional Psychology : Research and Practice ( http : //www.apa.org/pubs/journals/pro/ ) , Kathi A. Borden , PhD , Antioch University New England ● Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal ( http : //www.apa.org/pubs/journals/prj/ ) , Sandra G. Resnick , PhD , VA Connecticut Healthcare System ● Psychology and Aging ( http : //www.apa.org/pubs/journals/pag/ ) , Elizabeth A. L. Stine- Morrow , PhD , University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign ● Psychology of Violence ( http : //www.apa.org/pubs/journals/vio/ ) , Antonia Abbey , PhD , Wayne State University ● Psychology , Public Policy , and Law ( http : //www.apa.org/pubs/journals/law/ ) , Michael E. Lamb , PhD , University of Cambridge ● Training and Education in Professional Psychology ( http : //www.apa.org/pubs/journals/tep/ ) , Debora J .
Bell , PhD , University of Missouri-Columbia ● Traumatology ( http : //www.apa.org/pubs/journals/trm/ ) , Regardt J. Ferreira , PhD , Tulane University Current editors Thomas E. Joiner , PhD , Robert Greene , PhD , Daniel Houser , PhD , and Bernd Weber , PhD , Stephen D. Hart , PhD , Ronald T. Brown , PhD , Judith A. Cook , PhD , and Kim T. Mueser , PhD , Ulrich Mayr , PhD , Sherry Hamby , PhD , Michael E. Lamb , PhD , Michael C. Roberts , PhD , and Brian E. Bride , PhD , will receive and consider new manuscripts through December 31 , 2017 .
T hi s do cu m en t is co py ri gh te d by th e A m er ic an Ps yc ho lo gi ca l A ss oc ia tio n or on e of its al lie d pu bl is he rs .
T hi s ar tic le is in te nd ed so le ly fo r th e pe rs on al us e of th e in di vi du al us er an d is no t to be di ss em in at ed br oa dl y .
1563MANAGEMENT ETHNIC REPRESENTATIVENESS
