Lubell_AmJourPoliSci_2010_AxQ1.pdf
akOvQyDZFiUNizjhJlq2SYYediae-Lubell_AmJourPoliSci_2010_AxQ1.pdf.plain.html

Collaborative Institutions in an Ecology of Games Mark Lubell University of California , Davis Adam Douglas Henry West Virginia University Mike McCoy University of California , Davis This article seeks to improve our understanding of policy institutions and cooperation by adapting Long ’ s ( 1958 ) analysis of the ecology of games to the context of collaborative land use and transportation planning in California .
The traditional institutional rational choice analysis argues that collaborative institutions reduce the transaction costs of cooperation among multiple policy actors .
The ecology of games framework extends IRC by emphasizing the consequences of multiple institutions and identifies several reasons why collaborative institutions may actually reduce the amount of cooperation in existing policy venues .
Analyses of survey data from policy actors in five California regions demonstrate that higher levels of cooperation in collaborative institutions are associated with lower levels of cooperation in other land-use and transportation planning institutions .
C ollaborative institutions is one of the current buz- zwords for solving collective-action problems in multi-actor settings .
This article adapts Long ’ s ( 1958 ) ecology of games ( EG ) framework to address a fundamental issue that is typically ignored by insti- tutional rational choice ( IRC ) analyses of collaborative institutions—the existence of multiple institutions in a policy arena .
IRC studies hypothesize that collaborative institutions have a positive effect on cooperation by re- ducing transaction costs and building social capital that should spread to other institutions ( Lubell et al .
2002 ; Marshall 2005 ; Weber 1998 ) .
In contrast , the EG frame- work suggests that collaborative institutions may reduce the capacity of other existing policy games to produce co- operation .
The empirical study explores these arguments in the context of collaborative land-use and transporta- tion planning in California .
The IRC view of collaborative institutions has gener- ated a body of research that does not adequately cap- ture the reality that most collective-action situations involve multiple institutions .
This literature consists pre- dominantly of case studies of a single or a small num- ber of isolated collaborative institutions ( see Sabatier et al .
2005 for discussion ) .
Only a few studies use large-N , Mark Lubell is Associate Professor of Environmental Science and Policy , University of California , Davis , One Shields Avenue , Davis , CA 95616 ( mnlubell @ ucdavis.edu ) .
Adam Douglas Henry is Assistant Professor of Public Administration , West Virginia University , P.O .
Box 6322 , Morgantown , WV 26506-6322 ( Adam.Henry @ mail.wvu.edu ) .
Mike McCoy is Director of the Urban Land Use and Transportation Center , Institute of Transportation Studies , University of California , Davis , One Shields Avenue , Davis , CA 95616 ( mcmccoy @ ucdavis.edu ) .
comparative research designs and among these studies , few directly compare collaborative institutions to some other type of alternative institutional structure .
For ex- ample , Leach , Pelkey , and Sabatier ’ s ( 2002 ; see also Leach and Sabatier 2005 ) watershed partnerships project looks only at watersheds with partnerships , and not those with- out partnerships .
Agrawal ’ s ( Agrawal and Goyal 2001 ; Agrawal and Ostrom 2001 ; Agrawal and Yadama 1997 ) series of important studies looks only at single resource management institutions in several countries , without direct analysis of other competing institutions in the same area .
Lubell ’ s ( 2003 , 2004a , 2004b ) National Es- tuary Program ( NEP ) study directly compares estuaries with and without a collaborative planning process , but fails to consider the rich institutional ecology in which individual NEP programs are embedded .
Studies that focus on only single policy programs are ubiquitous in other policy areas as well and fail to recognize that policy outcomes are a product of decisions made in multiple institutions .
In contrast , the EG perspective assumes that pol- icy outcomes emerge from actors pursuing their self- interests in multiple , interdependent , and rule-structured games taking place within a geographically defined policy American Journal of Political Science , Vol .
54 , No .
2 , April 2010 , Pp .
287–300 C©2010 , Midwest Political Science Association ISSN 0092-5853 287 288 MARK LUBELL , ADAM HENRY , AND MIKE MCCOY arena.1 Decisions made in one institution may generate positive or negative externalities for other institutions in a policy arena , by influencing either payoffs or strate- gies .
Actors within individual games tend to ignore the potential cross-game externalities , and there are few in- stitutional mechanisms to coordinate games .
The unco- ordinated nature of the individual games and actors is a recipe for the collective-action problems seen in land-use and transportation planning .
Within any region , there are multiple public agencies , elected officials , local govern- ments , and interest groups , each seeking to achieve their own particular objectives within multiple games such as city planning , regional transportation planning , environ- mental impact reporting , etc .
These fragmented sets of “ traditional ” 2 planning institutions often lead to cumu- lative policy decisions that have negative effects for an entire region ( e.g. , increased air/water pollution , traffic , urban sprawl ) or fail to engage in mutually beneficial poli- cies ( e.g. , building a highway project that serves multiple jurisdictions ) .
Collaborative institutions are viewed as potential so- lutions to these types of collective-action problems and provide a useful laboratory for studying the IRC and EG arguments .
Collaborative institutions are typically de- fined as inclusive decision processes that bring together multiple stakeholders , help build networks and trust , and emphasize consensus decision procedures and voluntary compliance .
The relatively recent and widespread ap- pearance of collaborative institutions both in the United States and internationally has provoked a thriving re- search agenda ( O ’ Leary , Gerard , and Bingham 2006 ; Sabatier et al .
2005 ) , but there is no agreement about whether these institutions are effective .
We study collab- orative land-use and transportation institutions in five regions of California : Merced County , the Sacramento 1We treat the terms policy game , policy institution , and policy venues as synonyms because they all refer to interactions among actors guided by rules ( e.g. , consensus versus voting , which actors can participate ) about how collective decisions are made .
The process of interaction that occurs in a given institution could also be referred to as a policy or planning process , which are the terms normally used in the vernacular of real policy actors .
2The term traditional is used here because these types of institutions have historically been the primary method of land-use and trans- portation planning in California and most of the United States .
Local government planning is the oldest type , with environmen- tal and regional transportation planning emerging later and often as constraints on local government decisions .
Collaborative plan- ning institutions are the most recent type of institution and have evolved to try to coordinate the fragmented nature of the existing ecology of games .
The evolution of land-use and transportation planning from isolated local governments to collaborative institu- tions is a story unto itself , and the evolutionary processes driving such phenomena need further theoretical and empirical scrutiny .
metropolitan area , San Diego County , Riverside County , and Amador , Alpine , and Calaveras counties in the Sierra Nevada foothills ( the Tri-County region ) .
High popula- tion growth rates in these regions have created collective- action problems among stakeholders attempting to sat- isfy new transportation demands , provide economic development opportunities , meet environmental goals , and otherwise manage common resources .
Collaborative institutions have emerged in each region with the goal of integrating land-use and transportation planning , in- creasing cooperation , and resolving conflict among the policy actors involved in these issues .
The next section provides a more detailed compar- ison of the IRC and EG frameworks to motivate some empirically testable hypotheses about how collabora- tive institutions affect cooperative behavior and attitudes among land-use and transportation stakeholders .
The empirical analysis uses survey data from 752 stakehold- ers to estimate the marginal influence of collaborative institutions on cooperation throughout the ecology of games , taking into account participation in other types of policy games .
In contrast to the positive role of collabora- tive institutions posited by most IRC analyses , the results suggest there are potential negative interactions between collaborative institutions and cooperation in other policy venues .
Theoretical Approaches to Collaborative Institutions The IRC and EG frameworks offer alternative predictions about how collaborative institutions will influence coop- eration in a multi-institutional setting .
The central em- pirical question to be addressed is : what is the marginal effect of collaborative institutions for improving coop- erative attitudes ( fairness , policy satisfaction ) and be- haviors ( cooperative policy implementation ) relative to other ongoing policy games ?
The answer to this ques- tion hinges on whether or not individual participation in a collaborative institution increases or decreases co- operation throughout the ecology of games .
From an empirical modeling standpoint , this means analyzing in- teraction effects between participation in the collabora- tive institution and participation in traditional land-use and transportation games , so that the effects of the col- laborative institution are conditional on participation in other games .
The following sections discuss how the IRC and EG frameworks address this question and whether they should be considered competing or complementary theories .
ECOLOGY OF GAMES 289 Collaborative Institutions and Institutional Rational Choice The IRC label encompasses Ostrom ’ s Institutional Anal- ysis and Development Framework ( E. Ostrom 1999 ) , transaction cost approaches to institutions ( North 1990 ) , and what is generally referred to as neoinstitutional eco- nomics .
IRC has become the dominant framework in political science for understanding institutions and co- operation ( Moe 2005 ) .
The core argument of IRC is that institutions reduce the transaction costs of negoti- ating , enforcing , and monitoring cooperative agreements ( North 1990 ) .
Institutions can thus increase social wel- fare by helping secure the efficiency gains of cooperation .
From the normative perspective , this argument leads pol- icy analysts to recommend institutions that they believe reduce transaction costs .
The argument also drives so- cial science hypotheses that institutions should evolve to minimize transaction costs ( Alchian 1950 ; Lubell et al .
2002 ) .
Applied to collaborative institutions , IRC begins with the assumption that policy stakeholders are attempting to solve collective-action problems that occur when two or more interdependent actors make decisions that ig- nore social costs and benefits .
For example , in the con- text of transportation and land-use planning , there are many interrelated issues such as road systems , patterns of housing development , and habitat quality .
The policy ac- tors involved with these issues , such as local governments and state transportation agencies , make independent de- cisions that fail to take into account the consequences for other actors .
When all actors in a region ignore the social consequences of their individual management de- cisions , the resulting fragmentation can produce overall inefficient outcomes for the entire region .
Along with such inefficiencies comes a high level of conflict as differ- ent stakeholders attempt to secure their most preferred outcome through administrative , legislative , or legal processes .
Collaborative institutions are hypothesized to be a mechanism for creating cooperation among all of these stakeholders .
They reduce transaction costs by provid- ing a venue for developing a common understanding of the issues , gathering information about the consequences of different decisions , and building policy networks and trust among the actors .
The success of collaborative insti- tutions can be evaluated in the short term by observing increases in cooperative behavior such as joint research projects and shared implementation activities and also by increases in cooperative attitudes such as overall satisfac- tion and perceived fairness of existing policies .
Because collaborative institutions reduce transaction costs , these indicators of cooperation should not be limited to the specific collaborative institution , but should also increase in the other policy games in a particular arena .
For exam- ple , if trust among policy actors increases due to interac- tion in the context of a collaborative institution , or new scientific information clarifies complex causal relation- ships , the benefits should spread to other policy games like city/county planning where the same actors may be making decisions over the same issues .
The following hy- pothesis summarizes the standard IRC argument : IRC Hypothesis : Participation in a collaborative institu- tion increases the capacity of other exist- ing institutions to produce cooperative attitudes and behaviors .
Collaborative Institutions in an Ecology of Games Our adaptation of the ecology of games framework relies on four main concepts : policy issues , policy actors , pol- icy games , and policy arenas .
Policy issues involve some type of substantive collective-action problem such as wa- ter pollution , air pollution , traffic congestion , or loss of biodiversity .
The strategic structure of these collective- action problems is the same as the IRC framework— payoffs from using resources are interdependent , actors ignore the social costs of their decisions , and equilib- rium outcomes are often inefficient .
The EG framework adds the complication that issues may be interconnected through biophysical , economic , or social processes , so decisions made in the context of one issue may directly affect payoffs in other issues .
Policy outcomes depend on how individuals make decisions regarding the resources involved with each issue , for example , the amount of agri- cultural land converted to urban land in rural California or the amount of habitat lost when a new road is built .
Policy games are “ arenas of competition and cooper- ation structured by a set of rules and assumptions about how to act in order to achieve a particular set of objec- tives ” ( Dutton 1995 , 381 ) .
Political decisions made within each game directly affect policy implementation and re- sulting resource allocations .
In Ostrom ’ s ( 1999 ) terminol- ogy , policy games are “ collective-choice ” institutions that produce “ operational ” rules governing individual issues .
Each individual game derives its authority from some type of legislative , administrative , or judicial decision made at higher levels of the political system .
Policy games typi- cally have jurisdiction over multiple issues at a given time , and hence conversely policy issues are linked to multiple games .
For instance , city planning might address land-use 290 MARK LUBELL , ADAM HENRY , AND MIKE MCCOY and biodiversity , and biodiversity is also affected by water resources planning and state parks legislation .
These in- terconnections increase the likelihood of decisions in one game affecting payoffs in other games .
Policy actors have some “ stake ” ( hence the policy vernacular term stakeholder ) in the outcomes of policy games and the resulting rules governing specific issues .
Policy actors could be individual resource users like farm- ers or fishermen , or political actors like agency officials , interest groups , or elected officials .
The exact nature and magnitude of the stakes may vary across different policy actors—fishermen care about the fish populations and catch limits , bureaucrats care about budgets , politicians care about votes , and interest groups care about mem- bers and funding .
Actors participate in policy games with jurisdiction over issues they care about and also form networks with others actors in order to gain key political resources like information , credibility , and political in- fluence ( Berardo and Scholz 2010 ) .
The central focus of this article is how participation in different policy games affects individual actors ’ levels of collaboration and co- operative attitudes .
Policy arenas are territorially defined subsystems that encompass multiple issues ( e.g. , water pollution and air pollution ) , multiple games ( e.g. , city planning , state transportation planning ) , and multiple actors ( e.g. , local governments and interest groups ) .
In our research , the policy arenas are metropolitan regions consisting of sin- gle or multiple counties .
These regions are trying to solve a variety of policy issues involved with land-use and trans- portation planning .
Multiple games exist in each region , and the empirical study operationalizes these games as city and county planning , transportation planning , envi- ronmental review processes , natural resources planning , planning commissions , and city council/county board meetings .
These games , together with the collaborative institution that exists , constitute the set of governance institutions at hand in each region .
Each game provides different opportunities for involved actors to acquire re- sources and achieve their policy goals .
The set of gov- ernance institutions may succeed or fail in facilitating cooperation and solutions to regional collective-action problems .
For example , if one is interested in the over- all level of biodiversity ( a common-pool resource ) or the efficiency of transportation systems ( a public good ) in a region , then all of these games should be considered .
The linkages among issues , games , and actors are likely to be dynamic and change over time , and such dy- namics are a critical topic for future research .
An impor- tant aspect of collaborative institutions is that they usually do not absorb policy activities from previously existing venues .
For example , in the collaborative regional land- use and transportation institutions that we study , local governments continue to make key land-use decisions and federal transportation funding is allocated through existing formulas developed by other regional institu- tions .
Collaborative institutions may influence decision making in other policy games by increasing the quantity and quality of information , clarifying common objec- tives , building social capital ( i.e. , networks and trust ) , and providing grant funding that might not be available in other games .
In some cases , collaborative institutions are designed to reduce the conflict associated with the regulatory role of state and federal laws like the Endan- gered Species Act ( ESA ) , but the resulting decisions still require compliance from local governments or other ac- tors .
These potentially positive results of collaborative institutions are the basis for the standard IRC hypothesis .
The EG framework offers four possible reasons— increased transaction costs , venue shopping , sym- bolic policy , and limited attention—for an alternative hypothesis : EG Hypothesis : Participation in a collaborative institu- tion reduces the capacity of other exist- ing institutions to produce cooperative attitudes and behaviors .
The EG framework suggests that collaborative institu- tions may increase rather than reduce transaction costs because they constitute a new game overlaid on all of the prior “ traditional ” games .
If successful governance re- quires developing cooperative relationships throughout the ecology , there may be budget constraint on coopera- tion that is strained by the introduction of any new game .
This idea is supported by the oft-heard complaint from practitioners that collaborative institutions are “ unneces- sary ” bureaucracy that takes too much time and resources away from other projects .
Some actors and groups view collaborative institu- tions as an opportunity for strategic venue shopping and select to participate in games that increase the chance of realizing their policy goals .
For example , many envi- ronmental interests accuse collaborative institutions as being a compromise to economic interests and feel their interests are best protected by existing “ command-and- control ” institutions .
Other actors may view the voluntary nature of collaborative institutions as a way to reduce reg- ulatory requirements .
Actors may choose to participate in a particular institution to obtain bargaining power that will help them secure a greater relative share of any gains from cooperation ( Knight 1992 ) .
Those actors that prefer collaborative institutions to traditional processes will spend more energy developing cooperation in the new venue and move away from the other games .
This ECOLOGY OF GAMES 291 type of self-selection may cause cooperation to migrate away from existing games , although the limited author- ity of collaborative institutions may be a disincentive for switching games .
The increased transaction costs and venue selection arguments are still consistent with the IRC framework because they are based on rational choice .
But these argu- ments question the standard IRC hypothesis about collab- orative institutions by forcing the analysis to take seriously the existence of multiple games .
The IRC is certainly not averse to the concept of multiple institutions .
In their clas- sic article , Ostrom , Tiebout , and Warren describe mul- tiple institutions as “ polycentric ” governance where dif- ferent local government units within a metropolitan area provide different mixtures of public goods and conflicts are resolved by a “ variety of informal arrangements .
.
.for negotiating basic policies ” ( 1961 , 841–42 ) .
Collabora- tive institutions fit squarely into the idea of negotiat- ing common benefits through informal arrangements , and the standard IRC hypothesis is that such negotia- tions will reduce transaction costs and levels of coop- eration throughout the polycentric system .
In contrast , the EG framework recognizes that multiple games strain resources and provide opportunities for strategic venue shopping .
In addition to these rational choice considerations , the EG framework questions the efficacy of collaborative institutions on the basis of political psychology .
Collabo- rative institutions can function similarly to what Edelman ( 1971 , 1985 ) calls “ symbolic policy , ” which produces pol- icy agreements that quell political discontent without alle- viating underlying collective-action problems .
Consistent with the symbolic policy argument , Lubell ( 2004a ) finds that policy actors in estuaries that are included in the col- laborative National Estuary Program ( NEP ) have higher levels of consensus but the same levels of cooperation as estuaries outside the NEP .
If collaborative institutions serve as an “ emotion-satisfying symbol ” ( Edelman 1985 , 31 ) , then any resources spent engaged in such games may reduce cooperation by deflecting attention away from un- derlying problems .
The limited attention resources of political actors pre- vent them from simultaneously tracking activities in ev- ery game ( Jones and Baumgartner 2005 ; Kahneman 1973 ; Liu and Jones 2005 ) .
Thus , there may be “ payoff external- ities ” where actors are completely unaware of how their decisions and actions in one game affect their opportu- nities and outcomes in other games .
There may also be “ strategic externalities ” where cognitive constraints cause strategies played in one game to affect strategies in other games , even though the optimal choice in each game would be two separate strategies ( Bednar and Page 2007 ) .
Thus , by focusing attention on the new collaborative in- stitution , actors may not recognize how their behaviors are negatively affecting patterns of cooperation in other games .
The research presented here can not distinguish which of these four arguments is most important for analyz- ing the ecology of games .
The relevance of the differ- ent ideas depends on which “ model of the individual ” is used as a theoretical assumption about how actors make decisions ( Schlager and Blomquist 1995 ) .
Further theoretical development in the ecology of games frame- work requires specifying whether the IRC ’ s “ bounded rationality ” assumption or a more “ psychological ” or “ behavioral ” model of the individual is appropriate .
Maintaining the IRC model of the individual requires revising that framework to properly account for multi- ple games .
For example , Tsebelis ( 1990 ) shows how game theory can be used to analyze behavior in networks of “ nested games , ” where the optimal strategy in a single game will often change when an actor considers multiple games .
A more psychological model may call for developing a new and competing EG theory that incorporates behav- ioral approaches to individual decision making such as Payne , Betteman , and Johnson ’ s ( 1990 ) adaptive decision maker .
Bednar and Page ’ s ( 2007 ) “ game ( s ) ” theory for- malizes the cognitive constraints on individual strategies , but still relies on an optimization framework .
Another promising avenue is agent based and computational ap- proaches that incorporate diverse models of individual decision making and utilize concepts from complex adap- tive systems ( Miller and Page 2007 ) .
Complex adaptive systems are well suited to understanding the emergent patterns of cooperation , attitudes and networks that ex- ist in policy systems featuring multiple collective-action problems , multiple actors , and multiple governance in- stitutions with overlapping jurisdictions ( Connick and Innes 2003 ) .
These considerations place a greater burden on fu- ture empirical research , which should seek to identify the conditions under which collaborative institutions have a negative versus positive effect on cooperation , delin- eate the possible reasons for a negative effect from the four arguments ( increased transaction costs , venue shop- ping , symbolic policy , limited attention ) considered here , and invent ways for empirically differentiating between rational and psychological models of decision making in the field .
The contribution of this article is to di- rect attention to the importance of analyzing multiple games and provide some empirical evidence that chal- lenges the standard IRC hypothesis about collaborative institutions .
292 MARK LUBELL , ADAM HENRY , AND MIKE MCCOY The Ecology of Transportation and Land-Use Planning in California Table 1 summarizes the five regional , collaborative land- use and transportation planning institutions analyzed in this article , including the primary authoritative decisions that were the output of the planning processes .
These col- laborative institutions are designed to respond to state and federal transportation law and to alleviate the collective- action problems that occur when local jurisdictions make independent land-use and transportation decisions , ig- noring regional costs/benefits and linked policy issues .
These are exactly the types of collective-action problems predicted by the ecology of games perspective when actors attend only to the outcomes of a narrow , particular game .
In practical terms , the collaborative institutions seek to integrate expenditures and implementation procedures for transportation , urban development , and conserva- tion projects .
For instance , the San Diego Association of Governments uses the proceeds from a half-cent sales tax increase to acquire land identified by the habitat plan as suitable for mitigating the impacts of regional transporta- tion projects .
Every collaborative process studied here has similar examples .
Many of the collaborative processes are centered on Councils of Government ( COGs ) , Metropolitan Planning Organizations ( MPOs ) , or Regional Transportation Plan- ning Agencies ( RTPAs ) .
Each of these is a regional insti- tution that attempts to coordinate across multiple local governments on a variety of issues .
COGs are voluntary associations of city and county governments , with boards of directors consisting of elected officials from member jurisdictions .
The main function of COGs is to assist member local governments with regional planning for issues of multijurisdictional interest .
Along with a variety of information and data analysis services , COGs often for- mulate specific policy recommendations to be considered by member governments .
However , COGs play a strictly advisory role in planning , and the member governments retain all authority for land-use planning .
MPOs and RTPAs both exist to distribute transporta- tion funding to regional and local needs , with MPOs largely handling federal funding and RTPAs predomi- nantly state funds .
Transportation plans are the key pol- icy instrument of these regional organizations ; funding will only flow to approved plans .
MPOs exist only in larger metropolitan regions ; there are 12 single-county MPOs , and four multicounty MPOs in California .
Cali- fornia RTPAs are statutorily required to create Regional Transportation Plans ( RTPs ) for the area of their jurisdic- tion every three years in urban areas and every four years in nonurban areas .
These RTPs serve as guidelines for the distribution of state transportation funds to local and re- gional projects .
In regions with MPOs , such as Merced , RTPA and MPOs are combined into the same planning institution .
In regions without MPOs , such as the Sierra Tri-County area , RTPAs are the only regional transporta- tion planning agencies .
Also , in cases like Sacramento , the COG , RTPA , and MPO are all combined into a single planning entity .
While COGs , MPOs , and RTPAs are the closest thing California has to regional planning institutions , lo- cal land-use planning remains the exclusive domain of California ’ s 480 incorporated cities and , for unincorpo- rated land , planning is the domain of its 58 counties .
The only real authority of MPOs and RTPAs comes from the development and approval of regional transporta- tion plans and the distribution of state and federal trans- portation funds .
Along with regional planning entities and local government planning , land-use and transporta- tion decisions are also affected by environmental impact statement/review requirements , natural resources plan- ning under laws like the Endangered Species Act ( ESA ) , and a variety of other environmental and resource laws and rules .
Each law or rule generally determines who can participate in the games , and what types of policy issues are subject to collective decision making .
Habitat Conservation Planning ( HCPs ) under the ESA plays a key role in the Riverside and San Diego col- laborative institutions .
HCPs identify conservation lands and mitigation measures that must be implemented in or- der to protect endangered species .
Local governments are supposed to comply with the conservation plan in order to grant permits for new development .
HCPs thus tend to be controversial because they exert regulatory control over local decisions .
In the cases of Riverside and San Diego , the HCPs were developed in coordination with other transportation and land-use plans with the goal of integrating decision making , avoiding conflict , and en- hancing cooperation .
The key insight of the ecology of games perspective is that collaborative institutions can not be understood in isolation from all of the other traditional planning pro- cesses in each region , and actual outcomes of land-use and transportation planning emerge from a very large ecology of games .
For example , the outcome of a regional road building project is affected by existing transporta- tion plans developed in a statewide planning process , the land-use plans of local governments in whose jurisdiction the road will go , and a variety of environmental require- ments originating at the federal , state , regional , and local levels .
These same sets of games will affect many other in- frastructure or environmental projects in the same region .
ECOLOGY OF GAMES 293 TABLE 1 Summary of Five Regional , Collaborative Land-Use and Transportation Processes in California Name Summary Authoritative Decisions Merced County Project for Integrated Planning Began in 2002 as a result of an interagency agreement between the Merced County Association of Governments and several state and federal agencies .
Resulted in regional transportation impact fee assessment for new development .
Funding used for regional transportation projects consistent with regional plan .
The Tri-County Memorandum of Understanding Began in 2005 when the California State Department of Transportation proposed that a collaborative transportation planning effort including land-use considerations be undertaken by the Regional Transportation Planning Authorities in Alpine , Calaveras , and Amador counties .
Built on several previous revenue-sharing Memorandums of Understanding .
Revenue-sharing MOUs identify regional priority projects for distribution of pooled state transportation funding .
Sacramento Council of Governments ( SACOG ) Blueprint Process Began in 2000 when the Sacramento County Council of Governments instructed its staff to develop a land-use plan in conjunction with the update of the Metropolitan Transportation Plan required by the federal government .
The collaborative nature of the process was in response to local government and environmental criticisms of previous planning efforts .
Transportation plan manages spending of regional transportation funding .
Awards planning grants to cities and counties undertaking studies of development consistent with the regional Blueprint plan .
Riverside County Integrated Project Began in 1998 with the drafting of a multi-stakeholder “ vision statement ” accompanying the update of the Riverside County General Plan .
The integrated project then evolved to encompass the county general plan , a habitat conservation plan , and a transportation plan .
These plans were completed in 2003 .
Transportation plan manages spending of regional transportation funds ; General Plan identifies desired land uses throughout the county ; Habitat Conservation Plan identifies conservation lands acquisitions and mitigation measures for protection of endangered species .
San Diego Association of Governments North County Multiple Habitat Conservation Program Began in 1997 when San Diego County adopted a Multiple Species Conservation Program under the auspices of the Federal and State Endangered Species Acts .
The conservation planning efforts explicitly consider land-use and transportation issues associated with urban growth .
Ongoing collaborative planning efforts are focused on the North County subregion .
Habitat Conservation Program identifies conservation lands acquisitions and mitigation measures for protection of endangered species .
Mitigation and monitoring is coordinated with expenditures on regional transportation projects .
294 MARK LUBELL , ADAM HENRY , AND MIKE MCCOY These games are at best loosely synchronized across the physical and legal landscape of a particular region , leading to the types of collective-action problems and unintended consequences described by the ecology of games .
Many different actors participate in these games , ranging from state agencies like the California Depart- ment of Transportation , to local government officials , to environmental and economic development interest groups .
Most of these actors participate in more than one policy game , and each game provides opportuni- ties for stakeholder participation , requires information gathering from other actors , and sometimes mandates coordination from other agencies .
In other words , all of the traditional policy games have multiple oppor- tunities for cooperation and political discussion , not just the collaborative institution .
The ecology of games essentially constitutes the set of governance institu- tions in these regions , and these governance institutions may succeed or fail in solving regional collective-action problems .
Survey Research Design and Empirical Analysis We conducted an Internet/telephone survey of land-use and transportation stakeholders in all five study regions from March 2006 to June 2007.3 The survey popula- tion consisted of participants in the respective collabo- rative process , all stakeholders in the region identified as participants in Environmental Impact Statements in the California Environmental Quality Act database , and all planning staff/elected officials from city and county gov- ernments within the region .
The sample frame sought to encompass the broad range of policy actors associ- ated with the entire land-use and transportation planning ecology of games , not just those involved in the collabo- rative institution as is frequently done in other research .
There was a total of 752 respondents , with response rates of 46 % ( 127 ) respondents for Merced , 41 % ( 111 re- spondents ) for Tri-County , 25 % ( 116 respondents ) for 3The research occurred in three phases .
The first phase ( 3/06–5/06 ) collected data in Merced and Tri-County .
The second phase ( 9/06–11/06 ) collected data for SACOG , San Diego , and Riverside .
The third phase ( 5/07–6/07 ) contacted a small number of respon- dents for SACOG , San Diego , and Riverside who were identified as policy stakeholders by initial survey respondents but were not on our original sample list .
The respondents were first contacted by email , and then nonrespondents were contacted via telephone .
Some of the nonrespondents opted to complete the survey on the Internet , while others completed a telephone interview .
Riverside , 42 % ( 291 respondents ) for Sacramento , and 30 % ( 107 respondents ) for San Diego.4 To test the IRC and EG predictions , we estimate re- gression models with individual-level cooperative atti- tudes and behaviors as the dependent variables and mea- sures of participation in the collaborative institutions and other policy games as the main independent variables .
Interaction effects between collaborative policy partici- pation and traditional policy participation are the main theoretical focus of these models , because they show how the marginal effect of participation in the collaborative institution is conditional on participation in the other games .
The standard IRC hypothesis predicts a positive interaction , while the EG hypothesis predicts a negative interaction .
Measurement of Cooperative Attitudes and Behaviors Three different types of cooperative attitudes and behaviors serve as dependent variables related to the effectiveness of collaborative policy : cooperative policy implementation , perceived policy fairness , and policy sat- isfaction .
Following the EG framework , these questions are asked about land-use and transportation policies in general within a particular region , which can be affected by all of the games and not just the collaborative in- stitution.5 The empirical models can thus estimate the marginal influence of participation in different games on the overall indicators of cooperation within a region .
Cooperative implementation ranges from [ 0–7 ] and sums the number of “ yes ” answers from a list of seven joint policy implementation activities identified by Bar- dach ( 1998 ) as indicators of “ interagency collaborative capacity ” : sharing information/data , sharing personnel , joint research projects , joint grant/funding proposal , join- ing an interagency task force , signing a Memorandum of Understanding , or sharing permitting activities .
The attitude scales consist of averaged responses to mul- tiple 7-point Likert questions .
Perceived fairness is a 4The lower response rates in Riverside and San Diego can be at- tributed to the 2003 completion of the planning effort in Riverside and the fairly narrow focus on the North County area of San Diego .
One of the future challenges of research using the EG framework will be to construct surveys that remain relevant to respondents , who are normally more motivated when the survey focuses on a narrow , identifiable , and ongoing policy process .
5The questions were prefaced with “ Based on your experience with regional land-use and transportation planning issues , please pro- vide us your opinions on the following questions. ” These questions were asked without any references to a specific collaborative insti- tution ; questions about the specific collaborative institution came later in the survey .
ECOLOGY OF GAMES 295 three-item scale ( Cronbach ’ s alpha = .65 ) that asks re- spondents to rate the overall fairness of regional policies , how well their interests are represented , and whether or not their participation influences outcomes .
Policy satis- faction is a three-item scale ( Cronbach ’ s alpha = .79 ) that asks whether existing policies will resolve regional prob- lems , have effective leadership , and generate innovative solutions .
Measurement of Policy Game Participation and Control Variables The most important independent variables measure the frequency of participation in collaborative institutions and other policy games in each region .
Collaborative in- stitution participation sums the number of “ yes ” answers ( Cronbach ’ s alpha = .91 ) from a list of 11 different plan- ning activities specifically associated with the collabora- tive institution in each region , such as speaking with rep- resentatives , reading materials , going to meetings , writing plan alternatives , participating in vision exercises , com- menting on decision documents , etc .
The collaborative participation variable is differentiated from cooperative implementation because it measures activities associated with planning ( i.e. , collective choice ) rather than imple- mentation efforts .
To facilitate interpretation , this scale is normalized to range from 0 to 1 .
The frequency of participation is coded ( 1 = Never , 2 = Annually , 3 = Quarterly , 4 = Monthly , 5 = Weekly , 6 = Daily ) for six traditional policy games : environmen- tal review processes , city/county planning , transporta- tion planning , natural resources planning , local planning commissions , and county board/city council meetings .
Traditional planning participation is constructed using the following formula , where N = number of processes avail- able in the region and the denominator is the maximum frequency of participation minus one : N∑ 1 ( frequencyi − 1 ) /5 .
This summation creates a scale ( Cronbach ’ s alpha = .79 ) ranging from 1 to N that is then normalized to [ 0–1 ] ; thus , a score of one equals a respondent who participated daily in all traditional processes .
Following the Advocacy Coalition Framework ’ s ( Sabatier and Jenkins-Smith 1993 ) arguments about the relationship between belief systems and policy per- ceptions , four measures of political values serve as control variables : environmentalism , economic conser- vatism , inclusiveness , and smart growth values .
En- vironmentalism is a three-item scale ( Cronbach ’ s al- pha = .77 ) derived from Dunlap and colleagues ’ ( 2000 ) New Ecological Paradigm battery .
Eco- nomic conservatism is a four-item scale ( Cronbach ’ s alpha = .66 ) measuring whether the respondent be- lieves government should not interfere with private prop- erty rights .
Inclusiveness is a three-item scale ( Cronbach ’ s alpha = .53 ) measuring preferences about the appropriate breadth of public participation in policy , with higher val- ues indicating a broader range of interests .
Smart growth is a five-item battery ( Cronbach ’ s alpha = .67 ) measuring agreement with five smart growth principles : affordable housing , livable communities , cultural diversity , in-fill development , and alternative transportation .
Also included are single agree-disagree questions adapted from more general studies of political behav- ior and participation .
Trust in government asks whether or not government can generally be trusted to do what is right .
Trust in people asks whether or not people generally can be trusted .
Internal political efficacy asks whether the respondent feels well qualified to participate in politics , while external political efficacy focuses on whether or not people have any say in government decisions .
Different types of government agencies or stake- holder types may also have different opportunities , con- straints , and mandates for collaborative activities .
Thus , the analysis includes dummy variables for state govern- ment , local government , social interest groups , or eco- nomic interest groups .
Social interest groups include environmental groups , and economic interest groups in- clude land developers and real estate interests ; these two categories of groups are typically at the heart of land-use and transportation conflicts .
Federal government respon- dents are the baseline category in the regression analyses .
Regression Analysis : The Marginal Effects of Collaborative Institutions Table 2 begins the analysis by showing the frequency of participation in the six traditional policy games and the collaborative institution , as well as the correlation between participation and the measures of cooperation .
Respondents participate on average somewhere between quarterly and monthly in traditional planning institu- tions , with the frequency a bit lower for planning com- missions and council/board meetings .
They participate somewhat more than annually in the collaborative in- stitution , with an average of 3.38 specific collaborative institution activities .
These results suggest that partici- pation in the collaborative institution is not part of the regular job activities of most policy actors .
The correlations provide the first evidence that while collaborative institution participation is associated with more positive policy outputs , so are the traditional 296 MARK LUBELL , ADAM HENRY , AND MIKE MCCOY TABLE 2 Venue Participation Frequency and Relationship to Policy Outputs Mean Percentage of Cooperative Participation Regular Implementation Policy Policy Level Participants Activities Satisfaction Fairness Environmental Review Processes 3.64 56.91 % .22 .18 .19 City/County Planning 4.02 66.20 % .13 .26 .25 Transportation Planning 3.21 48.80 % .24 .36 .30 Natural Resources Planning 3.48 53.06 % .28 .15 .16 County Board/City Council Meetings 2.69 38.96 % .13 .20 .20 Planning Commission 2.36 30.72 % .05 ( NS ) .17 .13 Collaborative Institution Frequency 2.70 36.04 % .35 .38 .35 Collaborative Institution Activities 3.38 N/A .25 .17 .25 Notes : Cell entries in Column 2 are average scores for frequency of participation in policy venues as measured on a 6-point scale ( 1 = Never , 2 = Annually , 3 = Quarterly , 4 = Monthly , 5 = Weekly , 6 = Daily ) and collaborative process activities selected from a checklist of 11 options .
Regular participants are defined as having at least monthly participation .
Columns 3 through 6 show correlations between venue participation scores and policy outputs .
All correlations are significantly different from zero at p < .05 except where noted ( NS ) .
planning venues .
All the traditional venues except plan- ning commissions are positively correlated with coopera- tive implementation , and all of them have a positive effect on perceptions of policy fairness and satisfaction .
Coop- eration is not limited to a particular institutional struc- ture that has the label of collaborative planning—effective governance most likely requires cooperation throughout the ecology of games .
Table 3 provides a more robust analysis with random intercept regression models for all three of the dependent variables , combining data for all regions and including the control variables .
The random intercept models control for unobserved differences across the regions in the mean levels of the dependent variables , and robust standard errors are included to guard against heteroskedasticity .
Most importantly , the Table 3 models contain an in- teraction term between traditional and collaborative in- stitution participation in order to estimate any positive or negative feedback .
With the interaction term included , the slope coefficients for traditional and collaborative institu- tion participation should be interpreted as the marginal effect of participation in that particular institution when participation in the other institution is zero .
The results confirm that both types of institutions have some positive influence on cooperation .
When participation in tradi- tional processes is zero , then collaborative institutions do indeed have a positive marginal effect on cooperative im- plementation , perceived fairness , and policy satisfaction .
At the same time , when participation in the collaborative institution is zero , then traditional planning processes increase the level of cooperative implementation , policy satisfaction , and fairness .
However , the interaction term in all three models is negative , statistically different from zero at conven- tional levels , and large in magnitude .
As participation in the collaborative institution increases , the positive rela- tionship between traditional processes and cooperative attitudes/behaviors decreases .
The interaction effect can also be interpreted in reverse : as participation in tradi- tional processes increases , the marginal positive influ- ence of participation in the collaborative institution de- creases .
The negative interaction is consistent with the EG framework but is not predicted by standard IRC ar- gument or by the more general literature on collaborative institutions .
A more detailed picture of the interaction effects is provided by analyzing the data separately for each re- gion .
IRC theories , rightly understood , are concerned with matching the appropriate institutional structure to the particular circumstances of a given collective-action problem .
Thus , it may be the case that regions in which circumstances are favorable will have positive interactions between collaborative institutions and traditional pro- cesses , while in other cases there may be negative effects .
For example , SACOG is discussed as the leading example of collaborative planning in California , and thus might have a positive interaction effect , while the narrower and conflictual process in San Diego might have a stronger negative interaction effect .
To test this possibility , separate regression models for each region are estimated using the same exact variables as in Table 3.6 Figure 1 summarizes these results by plotting for each region the size of the collaborative institution regression coefficient on the x-axis and the size of the 6This is basically like a random coefficient model for the interaction and collaborative process coefficients , but a random coefficient model failed to converge when it contained the interaction effect .
We thus estimate each region separately .
ECOLOGY OF GAMES 297 TABLE 3 Random Intercept Models of Policy Outputs Cooperative Perceived Policy Policy Implementation Fairness Satisfaction Policy Game Participation Traditional Policy Processes 2.31 ( .43 ) ∗ 1.05 ( .24 ) ∗ .53 ( .24 ) ∗ Collaborative Institution 2.88 ( .65 ) ∗ 1.32 ( .38 ) ∗ 1.41 ( .41 ) ∗ Interaction : Traditional × Collaborative Institution −2.82 ( 1.00 ) ∗ −1.49 ( .60 ) ∗ −1.72 ( .66 ) ∗ Policy-Core Beliefs Environmental Values .03 ( .06 ) −.07 ( .04 ) ∧ −.06 ( .04 ) Inclusiveness −.10 ( .08 ) .07 ( .06 ) .16 ( .06 ) ∗ Economic Conservatism −.003 ( .07 ) .02 ( .04 ) .05 ( .04 ) Smart Growth .02 ( .10 ) −.04 ( .06 ) .09 ( .06 ) General Political Attitudes Trust in Government .14 ( .05 ) ∗ .13 ( .03 ) ∗ .20 ( .03 ) ∗ Trust in People −.02 ( .06 ) .09 ( .03 ) ∗ .05 ( .04 ) Internal Political Efficacy .09 ( .04 ) ∧ .07 ( .03 ) ∗ .05 ( .03 ) External Political Efficacy .17 ( .05 ) ∗ .15 ( .03 ) ∗ .10 ( .04 ) ∗ Organization Type ( Federal government is baseline ) State Government .39 ( .22 ) ∧ −.19 ( .13 ) −.09 ( .13 ) Local Government −.64 ( .18 ) −.12 ( .10 ) .07 ( .11 ) Social Interest Group .04 ( .29 ) −.22 ( .14 ) −.25 ( .17 ) Economic Interest Group −1.00 ( .28 ) ∗ −.08 ( .16 ) .14 ( .18 ) Model Fit Statistics Constant 3.14 3.06 1.49 F 11.71∗ 12.52∗ 8.56∗ R2 .19 .24 .19 u ( intercept ) .19 .14 .29 e ( residual ) 1.85 1.06 1.16 Rho ( Fraction of variance from ui ) .01 .02 .06 Note : Table entries are unstandardized slope coefficients from fixed effects random intercept regression model ; robust standard errors in parentheses .
∗Reject null hypothesis of coefficient = 0 , p < .05 , ∧p < .10 , one-tailed tests .
interaction effect on the y-axis for all three dependent variables .
None of the interaction effects are statistically greater than zero , and most strikingly , the larger the pos- itive coefficient for the collaborative process , the larger the negative coefficient for the interaction effect .
In other words , when cooperation is higher in collaborative insti- tutions , it is lower in traditional institutions .
The results are consistent across the range of the collaborative in- stitution coefficient , although it is hard to compare the effectiveness of different regions because the regions do not line up in the same order across variables .
However , SACOG and Riverside in general appear to have the small- est interaction effects , suggesting the negative feedback is less important in those regions .
Again , these results are consistent with the EG predictions although the data can- not distinguish between the range of mechanisms ( i.e. , budget constraint , venue shopping , symbolic policy , or limited attention ) that might produce these interaction effects .
There are also some interesting effects of policy core beliefs and more general political attitudes .
Environmen- talists are less likely to believe the policies are fair , re- flecting the general criticism of environmentalists that collaborative institutions cater to business interests .
In- clusiveness increases the level of perceived satisfaction ; people who want to include a wide range of interests tend to believe some common ground can be found among them .
More consistently , respondents who trust govern- ment and believe government is responsive to ordinary citizens are more likely to have cooperative attitudes and behaviors .
This reflects the importance of these variables for political cooperation in general .
298 MARK LUBELL , ADAM HENRY , AND MIKE MCCOY FIGURE 1 Size of Interaction Effect as Function of Collaborative Process Coefficient Merced Tri-County RiversideSACOG San Diego Merced Tri-County Riverside SACOG San Diego Merced Tri-County Riverside SACOG San Diego -1 0 -5 0 -1 0 -5 0 -1 0 -5 0 0 2 4 6 8 Cooperative Implementation Perceived Fairness Policy Satisfaction S iz e o f In te ra c ti o n E ff e ct C o e ff ic ie n t Size of Collaborative Institution Coefficient Graphs by Indicator of Cooperation Conclusion The goal of this article is to integrate institutional ratio- nal choice with Long ’ s ecology of games framework to address how cooperation emerges from multiple institu- tions interconnected by networks of actors seeking both political power and social capital .
Although IRC theory does not explicitly reject the existence of multiple institu- tions , this issue is rarely addressed by theory and almost never analyzed in empirical research .
Collaborative in- stitutions provide a useful laboratory for comparing the two approaches , because proponents suggest that collab- orative institutions reduce transaction costs and spread cooperation throughout the ecology of games .
In con- trast , consistent with the EG framework , our empirical study shows a negative interaction between collaborative institutions and traditional planning institutions in terms of their effects of cooperative attitudes and behaviors .
Thus , the question of governance requires understanding the evolution of cooperation across the entire ecology of games and not just a single institution .
The theoretical contribution of this analysis is mani- fest in the development of new and surprising hypotheses regarding collaborative institutions .
Both the hypotheses and findings run counter to the prevailing wisdom about the effectiveness of collaborative institutions .
Effective- ness is directly concerned with whether or not policies improve welfare , generally by increasing the efficiency or equity of resource allocations .
The prevailing wisdom is consistent with the theoretical arguments of the IRC— collaborative institutions increase welfare by increasing social capital and reducing the transaction costs of coop- eration .
This view is not only popular among academic researchers , but is also one reason that collaborative in- stitutions have become so widespread among real-world policy makers .
The EG framework directly challenges the sanguine view of collaborative institutions provided by IRC .
As out- lined in this article , four potential mechanisms may cause trade-offs between collaborative institutions and other traditional land-use and transportation planning games .
Two of those reasons , budget constraints on cooperation and venue shopping , can potentially be accounted for by revising the IRC framework to deal with multiple games .
The other two , symbolic policy and limited attention , may require a more realistic behavioral model of individ- ual decision making and thus spark the development of the EG framework as a new policy theory .
Even though this analysis is limited to five regions of California , it will hopefully motivate researchers and practitioners to ques- tion current trends and think about how the benefits of collaborative institutions are balanced with the necessity of developing cooperation in other policy games .
ECOLOGY OF GAMES 299 Overall , analyses of multiple games deserve a more central place in the study of public policy and governance .
Even at this early stage in the empirical research , the EG framework has provided some new insights about col- laborative institutions that go well beyond the traditional policy analysis strategy of comparing one policy institu- tion to another and asking which is better for solving some particular problem .
The EG framework requires consid- ering how all of the institutions combine to solve—or cause—collective-action problems .
Cooperation occurs in all policy games , not just institutions with the label of “ collaborative policy. ” There is potentially negative or positive feedback between the evolution of cooperation in one policy game and the potential for cooperation in other games .
Future research needs to include better iden- tification of games and measurement of game-specific be- havior , dynamic analyses that show the consequences of leaving and joining games over time for the structure of policy networks and the availability of political resources , and more formal mathematical or computational anal- yses of game ecologies that can sharpen the theory and hypotheses .
References Agrawal , Arun , and Sanjeev Goyal .
2001 .
“ Group Size and Col- lective Action : Third-party Monitoring in Common-pool Resources. ” Comparative Political Studies 34 ( 1 ) : 63–93 .
Agrawal , Arun , and Elinor Ostrom .
2001 .
“ Collective Action , Property Rights , and Decentralization in Resource Use in India and Nepal. ” Politics Society 29 ( 4 ) : 485–514 .
Agrawal , Arun , and Gautam Yadama .
1997 .
“ How Do Local Institutions Mediate Market and Population Pressures on Resources ?
Forest Panchayats in Kumaon , India. ” Develop- ment and Change 28 ( 3 ) : 435–65 .
Alchian , Armen A .
1950 .
“ Uncertainty , Evolution , and Eco- nomic Theory. ” Journal of Political Economy 58 : 211–21 .
Bardach , Eugene .
1998 .
Getting Agencies to Work Together : The Practice and Theory of Managerial Craftsmanship .
Washington , DC : The Brookings Institution .
Bednar , Jenna , and Scott Page .
2007 .
“ Can Game ( s ) Theory Explain Culture ?
The Emergence of Cultural Behavior within Multiple Games. ” Rationality and Society 19 ( 1 ) : 65–97 .
Berardo , Ramiro , and John T. Scholz .
2010 .
“ Self-Organizing Policy Networks : Risk , Partner Selection and Cooperation in Estuaries. ” American Journal of Political Science .
Forth- coming .
Connick , Sarah , and Judith E. Innes .
2003 .
“ Outcomes of Collaborative Water Policy Making : Applying Complexity Thinking to Evaluation. ” Journal of Environmental Planning and Management 46 ( 2 ) : 177–97 .
Dunlap , Riley E. , Kent D. Van Liere , Angela G. Mertig , and Robert E. Jones .
2000 .
“ Measuring Endorsement of the New Ecological Paradigm : A Revised NEP Scale. ” Journal of Social Issues 56 ( 3 ) : 425–42 .
Dutton , William H. 1995 .
“ The Ecology of Games and Its Ene- mies. ” Communication Theory 5 ( 4 ) : 379–92 .
Edelman , Murray .
1971 .
Politics as Symbolic Action : Mass Arousal and Quiescence .
New York : Academic Press .
Edelman , Murray .
1985 .
The Symbolic Uses of Politics .
Chicago : University of Illinois Press .
Jones , Bryan D. , and Frank R. Baumgartner .
2005 .
The Politics of Attention : How Government Prioritizes Problems .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press .
Kahneman , Daniel .
1973 .
Attention and Effort : Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice-Hall .
Knight , Jack .
1992 .
Institutions and Social Conflict .
Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press .
Leach , William D. , Neal W. Pelkey , and Paul A. Sabatier .
2002 .
“ Stakeholder Partnerships as Collaborative Policymaking : Evaluation Applied to Watershed Management in California and Washington. ” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21 : 645–70 .
Leach , William D. , and Paul A. Sabatier .
2005 .
“ To Trust an Adversary : Integrating Rational and Psychological Models of Collaborative Policymaking. ” American Political Science Review 99 ( 4 ) : 491–503 .
Liu , Xinsheng , and Bryan D. Jones .
2005 .
“ How Do Nations Choose What Games to Play ?
A Spatial Supergame Model of Bilateral Interactions. ” Presented at the annual meet- ing of the International Studies Association , Honolulu , HI .
Long , Norton E. 1958 .
“ The Local Community as an Ecol- ogy of Games. ” The American Journal of Sociology 64 : 251– 61 .
Lubell , Mark .
2003 .
“ Collaborative Institutions , Belief-Systems , and Perceived Policy Effectiveness. ” Political Research Quar- terly 56 ( 3 ) : 309–23 .
Lubell , Mark .
2004a .
“ Collaborative Environmental Institu- tions : All Talk and No Action ? ” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 23 ( 3 ) : 549–73 .
Lubell , Mark .
2004b .
“ Resolving Conflict and Building Coop- eration in the National Estuary Program. ” Environmental Management 33 ( 5 ) : 677–91 .
Lubell , Mark , Mark Schneider , John T. Scholz , and Mihriye Mete .
2002 .
“ Watershed Partnerships and the Emergence of Collective Action Institutions. ” American Journal of Political Science 46 ( 1 ) : 148–63 .
Marshall , Graham .
2005 .
Economics for Collaborative Environ- mental Management : Renegotiating the Commons .
London : Earthscan .
Miller , John H. , and Scott E. Page .
2007 .
Complex Adaptive Systems : An Introduction to Computational Models of Social Life .
Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press .
Moe , Terry .
2005 .
“ Power and Political Institutions. ” Perspec- tives on Politics 3 ( 2 ) : 217–33 .
North , Douglass C. 1990 .
Institutions , Institutional Change , and Economic Performance .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
O ’ Leary , Rosemary , Catherine Gerard , and Lisa Blomgren Bingham .
2006 .
“ Introduction to the Symposium on 300 MARK LUBELL , ADAM HENRY , AND MIKE MCCOY Collaborative Public Management. ” Public Administration Review 66 ( s1 ) : 6–9 .
Ostrom , Elinor .
1999 .
“ Institutional Rational Choice : An As- sessment of the Institutional Analysis and Development Framework. ” In Theories of the Policy Process , ed .
P. Sabatier .
Boulder , CO : Westview Press , 35–71 .
Ostrom , Vincent , Charles M. Tiebout , and Robert Warren .
1961 .
“ The Organization of Government in Metropolitan Areas : A Theoretical Inquiry. ” The American Political Sci- ence Review 55 ( 4 ) : 831–42 .
Payne , John W. , James R. Betteman , and Eric J. Johnson .
1990 .
“ The Adaptive Decision Maker : Effort and Accuracy in Choice. ” In Insights in Decision Making : A Tribute to Hillel J. Einhorn , ed .
R. M. Hogarth .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 129–73 .
Sabatier , P. A. , and Hank Jenkins-Smith .
1993 .
Policy Change and Learning : An Advocacy Coalition Approach .
Boulder , CO : Westview Press .
Sabatier , Paul A , Will Focht , Mark Lubell , Zev Trachtenburg , Arnold Vedlitz , and Marty Matlock , eds .
2005 .
Swimming Upstream : Collaborative Approaches to Watershed Manage- ment .
Cambridge , MA : MIT Press .
Schlager , Edella , and William Blomquist .
1995 .
“ A Comparison of Three Emerging Theories of the Policy Process. ” Political Research Quarterly 49 ( 3 ) : 631–50 .
Tsebelis , George .
1990 .
Nested Games : Rational Choice in Com- parative Politics .
Berkeley : University of California Press .
Weber , Edward P. 1998 .
Pluralism by the Rules : Conflict and Co- operation in Environmental Management .
Washington , DC : Georgetown University Press .
