Nall_AmJourPoliSci_2018_Jr4e.pdf
aBULvYbwPGb1wqbF5kmJmNp8ebze-Nall_AmJourPoliSci_2018_Jr4e.pdf.plain.html

Paths of Recruitment : Rational Social Prospecting in Petition Canvassing Clayton Nall Stanford University Benjamin Schneer Florida State University Daniel Carpenter Harvard University Abstract : Petition canvassers are political recruiters .
Building upon the rational prospector model , we theorize that rational recruiting strategies are dynamic ( Bayesian and time-conscious ) , spatial ( constrained by geography ) , and social ( conditioned on relations between canvasser and prospect ) .
Our theory predicts that canvassers will exhibit homophily in their canvassing preferences and will alternate between “ door-to-door ” and “ attractor ” ( working in a central location ) strategies based upon systematic geographical variation .
They will adjust their strategies midstream ( mid-petition ) based upon experience .
Introducing methods to analyze canvassing data , we test these hypotheses on geocoded signatory lists from two petition drives—a 2005–6 anti–Iraq War initiative in Wisconsin and an 1839 antislavery campaign in New York City .
Canvassers in these campaigns exhibited homophily to the point of following geographically and politically “ inefficient ” paths .
In the aggregate , these patterns may exacerbate political inequality , limiting political involvement of the poorer and less educated .
Replication Materials : The data , code , and any additional materials required to replicate all analyses in this arti- cle are available on the American Journal of Political Science Dataverse within the Harvard Dataverse Network , at : http : //dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/GZA3GY .
Political campaigns and movements try their best toattract new supporters , a process that challengescampaigns and their workers .
Whether in peti- tioning or in fundraising , identifying and recruiting sup- porters requires a situated rationality that operates in social and geographical space .
It requires thinking about where , geographically and in social networks , friends of a campaign are likely to be found .
A recruiter must not only act on existing knowledge of groups being targeted for recruitment , but must also revisit her strategies and judg- ments in light of experience .
A recruiter learns , adapts , and strategizes anew in a world where information is scarce and failure is more common than success .
For at least a decade , the dominant model of prospecting has reflected some of these realities but not others .
In a now classic article , Brady , Schlozman , and Verba ( 1999 ) articulated and tested the “ rational Clayton Nall is Assistant Professor , Department of Political Science , Stanford University , 616 Serra Street , Stanford , CA 94305 ( nall @ stanford.edu ) .
Benjamin Schneer is Assistant Professor , Department of Political Science , Florida State University , 113 Colle- giate Loop , 531 Bellamy , Tallahassee , FL 32306 ( bschneer @ fsu.edu ) .
Daniel Carpenter is Freed Professor of Government , Department of Government , Harvard University , Center for Government and International Studies , 1737 Cambridge Street , Cambridge , MA 02138 ( dcarpenter @ gov.harvard.edu ) .
We thank David Broockman , Jeffrey Friedman , Michael Heaney , Michael Herron , Eitan Hersh , Josh Kalla , Dean Lacy , Maggie McKinley , Melissa Sands , Sidney Verba , and discussants and audiences at the Dartmouth American Politics Workshop ( 2015 ) and the PolNet conference ( 2016 ) .
For research support , we acknowledge the Center for American Political Studies and the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard University .
prospector model ” of political recruitment .
The core insight is that “ like bank robbers going where the money is , ” recruiters seek support among those whose partic- ipation potential is high ( Brady , Schlozman , and Verba 1999 , 154 ) .
The recruiter first uses information to find prospects and then “ gets to yes ” by offering inducements , including information and material benefits .
These inducements capitalize on leverage , “ the relationship to a particular recruiter that gives the prospect a special incen- tive to assent ” ( Brady , Schlozman , and Verba 1999 , 155 ) .
Drawing on survey evidence , they find that individuals who have high civic skills and resources are more likely to be recruited .
Organizational recruiting may hence induce adverse selection by selecting those already predisposed to participate ( Enos , Fowler , and Vavreck 2014 ) .
The rational prospector model helpfully warns of the potential political inequality arising from American Journal of Political Science , Vol .
62 , No .
1 , January 2018 , Pp .
192–209 C©2017 , Midwest Political Science Association DOI : 10.1111/ajps.12305 192 PATHS OF RECRUITMENT 193 recruitment activities .
The model fails , however , to cap- ture three important factors animating political recruit- ment .
First , rational prospecting strategies are dynamic and often change in light of experience .
The Brady- Schlozman-Verba prospecting model does not account for this adaptation , nor can it easily be captured in static , cross-sectional survey data such as theirs .
Second , the ra- tional prospecting model does not consider that rational prospecting occurs under the constraints of geography .
Sometimes canvassers position themselves where many potential recruits are , but sometimes they might walk or drive door-to-door in a form of “ grid search. ” Third , although Brady , Schlozman , and Verba ( 1999 ) identify social closeness as a factor in prospecting , they frame it in terms of personal familiarity and social leverage .
Re- cruiters often do not know their targets ahead of time , however .
They have to search for them .
The concept of social closeness needs broadening , to include those who share common attributes and socioeconomic back- grounds.1 In this article , we develop an alternative theory of re- cruiting that takes theoretical and empirical lessons from petition canvassing .
In our theory ( fully formalized in the supporting information ) , canvassers choose canvass- ing locations and select between two canvassing methods : going door-to-door or adopting an “ attractor ” method , in which the canvasser positions herself at a location with a flow of potential petition signers ( e.g. , setting up a table at a busy mall or farmers ’ market populated by supporters ) .
We examine multiple implications of this model us- ing several original databases of geocoded signatures col- lected from archives .
Our primary data source is a sample of petition signatory addresses from 22 local anti–Iraq War initiative campaigns conducted by antiwar activists in predominantly Democratic towns and cities in Wiscon- sin , mostly during spring 2006.2 We also examine how one Wisconsin congressional campaign capitalized on homophily-driven “ friends and neighbors ” politics to sat- isfy its nominating paper requirements .
Finally , we draw on a database of signatories and geocoded addresses from two 1839 antislavery petitions circulated in New York City .
By geocoding and plotting the sequential tracks of 1Homophily ’ s role is consistent with Brady , Schlozman , and Verba ( 1999 ) and has recently received attention in the voter mobilization literature ( e.g. , Enos and Hersh 2015 ) .
2Large campaigns often use low-wage canvassers in petition cam- paigns .
The canvassers in these grassroots initiatives were unlike many paid canvassers : older ( mean age : 53 years ) and extremely regular voters .
Interviews with campaign canvassers confirm that they were older Democratic and antiwar activists .
Canvasser char- acteristics drawn from the state voter file appear in the supporting information .
signatures collected , we observe how campaign canvassers weigh the costs and benefits of alternative strategies .
How Petitioning Teaches Us about Recruitment in General Petition canvassing surely differs from the recruitment of organizational participants as described by Brady , Schlozman , and Verba ( 1999 ) .
While political scientists and sociologists have studied recruitment to activist or civic organizations ( Heaney and Rojas 2007 ; McAdam 1986 ) and voter mobilization ( Gerber and Green 2000 ; Rosenstone and Hansen 1993 ) , petition canvassing lies somewhere in between .
Like recruiters for high-risk ac- tivist groups or political organizations , a petition can- vasser must persuade potential signers to engage in a public and potentially hazardous act.3 Unlike voter mo- bilization , which entails passive receipt of a message , fol- lowed by a decision whether to engage in the public ( and published ) act of voting , a canvasser must persuade an individual to sign on the spot .
However , like voter mobi- lization canvassers , petition canvassers are typically un- der pressure to contact ( and convert ) large numbers of individuals quickly .
When canvassing for petitions , a re- cruiter primarily seeks to gather a set number of sig- natures , whereas in recruiting activists , the recruiter may seek additional contributions , including time , energy , and money.4 In short , petitioning shares at least three theoreti- cally relevant elements with political recruitment more generally : The role of the recruiter : Encouragement and so- licitation are central to the petitioning process and induce participation ( Brady , Schlozman , and Verba 1999 ; Han 2016 ) .
Sequential search : As with voter mobilization canvassers or fundraisers , likely supporters can- not be known with certainty , and the population can not be searched all at once .
Persuasion and inducements : Communication with targets is integral to the recruiting act , and 3For example , black parents who petitioned for school desegrega- tion in the American South faced economic coercion , including employment blacklists ( Mickey 2015 , 200–201 ) .
4In addition , there is growing evidence that signing a petition is associated with subsequent participation .
Recent evidence suggests that signing an electronic petition is a gateway to participation ( Cruickshank , Edelmann , and Smith 2010 ) , and some experimental evidence testing the “ foot in the door ” persuasion method ( John et al .
2013 ; Lee and Hsieh 2013 ) supports our predictions .
A recent observational study suggests that petition signers are more likely than nonsigners to vote later on ( Parry , Smith , and Henry 2012 ) .
194 CLAYTON NALL , BENJAMIN SCHNEER , AND DANIEL CARPENTER the canvasser must offer incentives in the form of persuasion or tangible benefits .
While petitioning differs slightly from other forms of participation , highly granular petition data offer rich lessons for the study of political recruitment .
Petition signatory lists , abundant in government archives , can be used to measure effectiveness ( Carpenter and Moore 2014 ) across canvassing efforts .
Yet , as valuable as the data across petitions are , the data within petitions are just as valuable and , to date , have been almost entirely ig- nored .
Every petition contains a prayer ( a complaint or request ) and a signatory list .
Combined with informa- tion about the signatories and the milieu in which they were canvassed , the signature sequence provides rich in- formation about the strategies used by recruiters and their organizations .
We theorize the choice of strategy based upon a multiarmed bandit model of a canvasser who alter- nates , with dynamic rationality and Bayesian learning , among locales and canvassing method .
The theory em- beds the canvasser in an environment where the spatial distance between signatories and the social distance be- tween canvasser and prospects ( akin to the “ closeness ” concept of Brady , Schlozman , and Verba 1999 ) matter greatly .
Aspects of canvassers ’ dynamic search strategies can either exacerbate or ameliorate inequality .
When engaged activists canvass among similar citizens , the disengaged are less likely to hear political appeals and will lose an opportunity to exercise their political voice .
Further- more , when canvassers abandon a canvassing locale due to canvassing failure ( perhaps due to low average engage- ment levels ) , residents of that neighborhood will not be mobilized .
As elsewhere in politics , individual rational action can aggregate to undesirable social outcomes .
However , our theory of canvassers as dynamic social op- timizers does suggest countervailing tendencies that may reduce inequality .
First , homophily may produce redun- dant search strategies , such that canvassers repeatedly visit high-propensity neighborhoods , to the point of diminish- ing returns .
Canvassers will then , according to our theory , abandon those locales .
Homophily , in short , can yield di- minishing returns , leading canvassers into less familiar areas .
Second , following the logic of option values , our theory indicates that , all else held equal , canvassers will visit locales where the prospects of success are uncertain but where higher variance can lead to higher payoffs .
To the extent that citizens with low participation propensity frequent such locales , such exploratory canvassing has the potential to reduce inequality .
Petitioning and Rational Social Prospecting Rational petition canvassing occurs in a spatial and dynamic context .
Our theory—developed ver- bally here , with the formal model in the support- ing information—substantively amends the Brady- Schlozman-Verba prospecting model in two important ways .
First , our theory and our empirics account for can- vassers ’ operation in a spatial setting , and we incorporate spatial costs ( those associated with search across geo- graphic space ) into the theory .
Second , our theory ac- counts for dynamic rationality in two ways : learning and the valuation of the future .
We examine the behavior of a canvasser facing a population of individuals , sequen- tially encountered depending on the canvassing method chosen , with uncertainty over the targeted population ’ s propensity to support the canvasser ’ s cause .
The canvasser seeks to maximize the number of signatures at a given cost .
Costs depend upon the method chosen and the social mi- lieu in which it is carried out .
Canvassers continually update their beliefs based on the success or failure of each signature attempt .
Each attempt generates information about the population canvassed ; the canvasser then turns to the next potential signatory with information updated based on her last solicitation .
Strategies : Where to Go ?
What to Do ?
How Long to Stay and Stick ?
Our theory imagines the canvasser as an experimenter of sorts , faced with three things to choose : ( 1 ) a set of locales from which signatures could be gathered , ( 2 ) one of two methods of prospecting , and ( 3 ) once a combination of locale and method ( i.e. , a strategy ) has been chosen , how long to stay with that combination .
The canvasser faces a set of locales in which to collect signatures .
Each locale has two characteristics .
The first is the throughput rate , the probability that a potential sig- natory will arrive at the petitioning locale in a given time period.5 The throughput rate pertains only to the attrac- tor method ; canvassers using door-to-door methods are assumed to be unaffected by it .
The second is the signa- ture rate , the probability that a person in a given locale would sign the petition if asked to do so .
Initially , the can- vasser knows only the expected signature rate and learns 5This flow is memoryless ( an arrival now neither increases nor decreases the chance of an arrival in the next period ) , and it is assumed that no more than one potential signatory can arrive in a given period .
PATHS OF RECRUITMENT 195 about the actual rate only though costly experience , by attempting to collect signatures .
The canvasser can alternate between two different methods .
The first , called the attractor method , places the canvasser at a single spot in a locale ( perhaps a cross- roads or meeting place ) where she seeks signatures from passersby .
The second , called the door-to-door method , has the canvasser traverse geographic space within a locale , usually visiting potential signatories ’ households .
The conduct of the petitioning campaign unfolds in discrete time .
The canvasser computes the value of each strategy in each period .
She then updates the relative value of her strategy choices based on the outcome from the last period .
The canvasser may choose a quitting strategy with no costs expended and no signatures gathered .
( This accounts for the value of the canvasser ’ s time when not canvassing , and it is necessary to pin down the theory . )
The Choice of Method .
The value of the attractor method depends upon the characteristics of the social milieu in which the petition is displayed , as well as the sequential success or failure of the solicitations for signa- tures .
The expected value of visiting a locale under the attractor method can be understood as the product of the per-period throughput rate and the expected signature rate , with each period having a fixed and known cost .
The door-to-door method requires the sequential transportation of the petition to a series of addresses in a selected locale .
The total cost of approaching the next potential signatory depends on two factors : the ge- ographical distance between the location of the previous solicitation and the next one , and the social distance be- tween the canvasser ’ s self-perceived social position and the canvasser ’ s perception of the social position of the next address .
Determining the costs due to geographical distance is straightforward ; all else equal , traveling greater distances is more costly than traveling shorter distances .
We thus expect canvassers to minimize distance between signature attempts .
Ex post , given a set of signatures , door- to-door canvassers will appear to have selected a route that minimizes distance traveled ( Applegate et al .
2011 ) .
When a canvasser approaches a house or building whose residents differ more from her in age , race , in- come , or other ( partially ) observable characteristics , we presume that the social distance between canvasser and potential signatory is larger .
Because this may make the canvasser less comfortable or contribute to difficulties in interpersonal communication , she will internalize this distance as a cost .
The cost of solicitation in the door- to-door method thus differs from the cost of solicitation under the attractor method .
It varies by period , as each new address is unlikely to have the same geographic dis- tance and social distance as the last one .
As with the attractor method , commencing the door- to-door method is simple .
The canvasser selects from among the same set of locales as could be chosen under the attractor method , and she begins door-to-door can- vassing in the neighborhood with the highest expected canvassing value .
Learning about Locations and Optimizing Among Strategies The key to our theory is that canvassers know a lot about locales—their throughput rate , the cultural and geographic distances they must navigate—but they lack information about signature rates .
Uncertainty about sig- nature rates can only be reduced through costly expe- rience ( asking for signatures ) , thus rendering signature rates an experience good .
Put differently , we assume that from period to period , the canvasser updates over signa- ture probabilities according to whether her solicitations are met with success or failure , but that other parameters such as throughput are fixed and geographic , and that so- cial distances to the next address under the door-to-door method are known throughout .
Learning from experience requires a rule defining how the canvasser substitutes new information for old .
We assume that the canvasser uses Bayes ’ rule—which specifies the marginal rate of substitution for new infor- mation , conditioned on the information one already has .
We understand the prior as a beta distribution , which is updated in a series of Bernoulli trials ( canvassing at- tempts ) .
Assuming that upon each solicitation , every suc- cess ( signature ) counts for 1 point and every failure counts for 0 , the Bayesian canvasser would update as follows .
Suppose that going into a given locale , the canvasser has a prior belief that one-fourth of the people she asks will sign .
A beta distribution represents this “ prior ” as if it were based on a previous experiment of four asks , one of which succeeded.6 Upon a successful canvassing at- tempt , the Bayesian canvasser would update the posterior to two successes in five asks , whereas a failure would lead the canvasser to update the posterior to one success in five asks .
Thus , the canvasser updates expectations over future success based upon past experience .
6The prior would be more “ precise ” if , for instance , it were based upon two successes in eight asks , more so if it were based upon five successes and 20 asks , and so on .
A beta distribution with mean 1 4 would thus be a “ mean-preserving spread ” of one with mean 5 20 .
We exploit the possibility of mean-preserving spreads in the formulation of Hypothesis 4 .
196 CLAYTON NALL , BENJAMIN SCHNEER , AND DANIEL CARPENTER Optimal Sequential Canvassing as a Multiarmed Ban- dit Problem .
Our formal framework is a special case of bandit learning developed in statistical decision theory ( Banks and Sundaram 1992 ; Bellman 1957 ; Gittins 1989 ) .
A bandit model conceives of the canvasser as an experi- menter , trying different locales or strategies as a gambler would try pulling different arms in a row of slot machines ( the “ bandit ” ) .
Unknown signature rates lead to uncer- tainty over the returns to canvassing in each locale .
After soliciting a signature , the canvasser updates her beliefs about the value of the locale .
The canvasser grows more certain , but never perfectly informed , about each locale ’ s signature rate as she solicits there .
( Only the “ quitting and sitting ” strategy has a value that is known and both time- and location-invariant . )
The canvasser maximizes a utility function that represents the summation of the expected value gained from signatures in future periods , minus the cost of canvassing for those signatures , where each period ’ s value of realization is discounted at a constant rate .
Because the canvasser forms expectations over the returns to solicitation in each locale , she rank-orders method-locale pairs from the very start by their expected signature rate and , taking into account canvassing costs , their expected value .
She starts in Period 1 with the method-locale pairing that offers the highest expected value .
In Period 2 , having observed a success or failure , she decides whether to continue with that pairing or choose the next best option .
This choice over whether to continue or to switch defines the canvasser ’ s dynamic search problem .
Given this dynamic search problem , the canvasser ’ s knowledge , and her updated value of the current method- locale pairing , her optimal strategy is to choose be- tween continuation and switching according to an “ index ” policy developed by Gittins ( 1989 ) .
Intuitively , every method-locale pairing with an uncertain return has a minimum certain reward that an agent would prefer instead , given everything that the agent knows about the uncertain pairing .
The Gittins Index thus defines a cer- tainty equivalent for each method-locale pairing , and the optimal policy is always to choose that pairing with the highest index value .
The canvasser ’ s optimal policy can be stated as follows : The Canvasser ’ s Optimal Policy .
The canvasser adopts the pairing of method and locale that maximizes the dynamic allocation index ( DAI , or Gittins Index ) , where the DAI for each method-locale pairing is the sum of the expected current-period canvassing value ( expected signature rate minus geographic and social canvassing costs ) and the continuation value ( the value of the can- vassing problem from the next period ever after , assuming optimality in the future ) .
The DAI for each locale-method pairing is strictly increasing in the locale ’ s signature rate and strictly decreasing in the period ’ s associated costs of canvassing .
Comparative Statics and Hypotheses Using the general optimization rule defined by the Gittins Index ( see Equation A-17 in the supporting information ) and generating rules for “ switching conditions ” among different method-locale pairings , we derive the following hypotheses .
1 .
Cost-Driven Canvassing : A canvasser will be more likely to terminate door-to-door canvassing in a given locale following jumps in the geographic and social costs of soliciting the next address .
An increase in the total cost of soliciting a signature for the current method-locale pair will , holding all else constant , lower its relative position in the ranked list of method-locale strategy options .
As a result , the probability that some other method- locale pair will have a higher index value ( and will therefore be the optimal choice ) increases .
This hypothesis yields two testable implications : ( 1a ) the signatory list of petitions canvassed door-to-door will be more likely to end or to limit out in the presence of a natural or con- structed geographic barrier ( e.g. , a river , the end of a street , a highway ) ; ( 1b ) the signatory list of a petition canvassed door-to-door will be more likely to end or limit out in the presence of in- creased social distance between the canvasser and the next solicited address .
2 .
Homophily : A canvasser will be more likely to choose a door-to-door method as her social dis- tance to the next potential signatory decreases .
By construction , the distance costs for any door- to-door method-locale pair surpass the distance costs for any attractor method-locale pair .
In any rank ordering of method-locale index values , a decrease in social distance will only have the ef- fect of increasing the relative ranking of door-to- door method-locale pairs .
As a result , the odds that a door-to-door method is the optimal choice must be weakly increasing .
3 .
Dynamic Locale Switching : A canvasser will be more likely to terminate canvassing in a method- locale pair as the signature rate in a locale declines , and more likely to continue in a method-locale pair as the signature rate is maintained or rises .
The PATHS OF RECRUITMENT 197 signature rate directly enters into the optimiza- tion problem through the application of Bayes ’ rule by the canvasser .
An increasing signature rate leads the canvasser to have higher expectations over future successes in the current method- locale pair .
Holding all else equal , this will lead the method-locale pair to maintain its position in the rank ordering of all method-locale pairs according to the Gittins Index .
This hypothesis has an observable implication : For those petitions that are canvassed door-to- door , increasing intersignatory distance within any sequence of signatures on the same petition will precede the petition ’ s termination.7 4 .
Uncertainty : For a given method-locale pair , a canvasser is as likely or more likely to continue can- vassing as locale-specific uncertainty increases , all else held equal .
A canvasser ’ s uncertainty is higher in a locale when the effective number of obser- vations that compose her prior is lower.8 In the supporting information , we prove the hypothe- sis and also provide an example to demonstrate its logic .
Due to space constraints and the difficulty of pre- cise measurement of locale-specific uncertainty , we do not directly test Hypothesis 4 in this article .
We state it nonetheless , since if true it implies behavior that may , at the margin , reduce or moderate participatory inequal- ity .
It also provides a perspective on why certain high- mobility locales about which recruiters know less—such as New York City in the 1830s—will be targeted .
We acknowledge here that Hypothesis 2 relies upon the assumption that the social distance parameter ap- pears in the cost function of the door-to-door method but not the attractor method .
We recognize that “ attrac- tor canvassing ” entails social distance costs .
However , our assumption is premised upon the relative effect of social distance in these two strategies .
Door-to-door canvassing is more likely to require intrusion into another person ’ s property or social milieu .
Our hypothesis requires only that , within any given locale , the social distance contri- bution to canvassing costs is higher in a door-to-door method than for the attractor strategy .
7While this may seem intuitive , only a theory that embeds within- petition learning ( especially from failure ) can generate it .
Particular conditions on the distribution of signatures and addresses are also required for the hypothesis to hold ; consult Lemma 1 in the sup- porting information .
8We thank an anonymous reviewer for this point .
Data and Methods We present empirical evidence of canvasser strategies con- sistent with our hypotheses in a set of statistical case stud- ies , using petitions obtained through archival research and public records requests .
We introduce new method- ological tools to discern canvassers ’ choice between the door-to-door and attractor method , based on statistics that can easily be generated from petition documents .
We describe the data , demonstrate this method , and then present evidence from several petition canvasses consis- tent with several of our hypotheses .
Data Our first case study relies on a database of ballot access petitions collected in Wisconsin between 2005 and 2008 , drawn from antiwar groups ’ efforts to place anti–Iraq War “ sense of the city ” resolutions on ballots in numerous municipalities across Wisconsin , in addition to candidate ballot access petitions collected for Representative Gwen Moore of Wisconsin ’ s 4th Congressional District .
The second study is based on antislavery petitions collected in New York City and sent to Congress in 1839 .
The data sources , though very different , share a common structure .
Each petition consists of a list of signatures and corresponding home addresses , reveal- ing both the sequence and geographic location of the signatories .
Furthermore , each petition is made up of many subpetitions—pages on which canvassers identi- fied themselves and gathered signatures , which were then combined into a single longer document or complete submission .
These differences allow us to study changes in behavior within each canvasser petitioning effort .
Pe- titions can therefore be encoded as two-mode network data , that is , data mapping the relationships between two populations : canvassers and signatories .
Moreover , most of the petitions in these two case studies include canvasser and signatory street addresses , enabling us to encode can- vassers ’ geographic path and attach , to each signatory , tract- and precinct-level demographic data .
Statistical Methods to Detect Canvasser Strategies To discern canvassers ’ petition patterns , we rely on the se- quence of signatures on the petitions .
For any set of con- secutive signatures , a travel path is implied by the route between addresses .
The distance between any two con- secutive signatories on a petition page is intersignatory 198 CLAYTON NALL , BENJAMIN SCHNEER , AND DANIEL CARPENTER distance ( ISD ) .
We calculate intersignatory distance us- ing the straight-line distance between addresses .
Straight- line distance tends to underreport distances traveled on a street grid ( i.e. , Manhattan distance ) but correlates highly with other distance measures.9 Our key insight is that , for any fixed group of pe- tition signatories , door-to-door canvassing will tend to generate shorter ISDs than will an attractor method .
Un- der an attractor method , there should be no meaningful geographic dependence in the sequence of recorded signa- tures .
This difference between geographically consecutive signatures and those seemingly drawn at random from geographic space can be exploited to classify petitions as being walked ( the door-to-door method ) or placed at a central location ( the attractor method ) .
A canvasser col- lecting signatures at a single attractor point will , all else equal , have higher average ISD values .
As our first measure , we adopt the average intersig- natory distance per canvasser .
Some values of this mea- sure will preclude a door-to-door method , especially if we know whether the petitions were gathered in the same day , whereas short distances per signature could result from door-to-door canvassing or simply from an attractor method that reaches a very limited geographic area .
To distinguish canvasser method further , we turn to an additional metric that combines intersignatory dis- tance with data on the sequence of signatures to examine whether a particular path minimizes total ISD .
Reverse engineering the traveling salesman problem ( TSP ) from observed petition paths allows us to discern the strategies employed by the canvassers .
The TSP is a classic opti- mization problem in which an individual who must visit multiple predetermined locations ( in the classic example , stops on a sales route ) must decide on the order of visits to minimize travel distance ( or time ) and visit each stop only once .
A petition sheet containing signatures collected door- to-door will tend to resemble visits made under an opti- mal solution to the TSP applied to signatories ’ addresses .
Under the attractor method , the sequence of signature locations will not resemble an optimal solution .
If no ge- ographic dependence between signatories exists , we typi- cally will not reject the null hypothesis that the signatures were collected from addresses at random .
Figure 1 displays examples of canvasses conducted under a door-to-door and an attractor canvassing method .
The first map illustrates the route taken by a 9We also used the Google Maps API to calculate driving distances that would have been accumulated in the course of canvassing .
These were highly correlated ( r = .85 or better ) with straight-line distance .
FIGURE 1 Petition Routes , , Note : The top panel in this figure displays a rep- resentative door-to-door route from Stoughton , Wisconsin , gathered in 2005 ; the bottom panel displays an example of probable attractor can- vassing from New York City in 1839. canvasser for a local antiwar initiative campaign who walked door-to-door in Stoughton , Wisconsin .
The dis- tance between signatures is low , and the route taken is the shortest available .
The second map displays the se- quence of signatures from a page of a New York City 1839 antislavery petition , which appears to have followed an attractor method .
The distance between signatures is substantial—suggesting either a high degree of difficulty convincing prospective signatories to sign or that the can- vasser found a desirable location and attempted to attract signers .
The route traveled does not minimize distance .
Taken together , these characteristics suggest the canvasser laid out the petition .
PATHS OF RECRUITMENT 199 We employ similar logic to distinguish formally be- tween a door-to-door and an attractor method .
For each sequence of signatures , we estimate a solution to the TSP based on a greedy nearest-neighbor algorithm , in which the agent goes to the next nearest location .
This route serves as a benchmark.10 The ratio of distances for the actual route compared to the TSP route provides a rough measure to assess signature sequences .
It illustrates the extent to which the route taken is nonoptimal .
To perform hypothesis testing , we compare the dis- tance on this route to the set ( or a sampled distribution ) of all possible routes and then , applying principles of ran- domization inference , we calculate its quantile in the null distribution .
A smaller quantile indicates that the route in question is much shorter than would be expected only due to chance ordering of petition signatories .
For a route with distance d , we evaluate the cumulative distribution function F ( d ) = r , where “ route score ” r is constrained such that 0 ≤ r ≤ 1 .
For cases with k < 10 , we perform this calculation by generating the full distribution and determining the share of possible routes greater than the route taken .
For signature sequences with k ≥ 10 , for which a brute force computation is infeasible , we instead take a random sample ( with replacement ) of all possible route distances .
Since the sample distribution converges in the limit to the full distribution , we use a sample-based estimate of the cumulative distribution function to gen- erate an estimated route score , F̂ ( d ) .
Smaller values of the route score denote routes substantially shorter than those that would appear by the typically random plac- ing of names on a petition collected under the attractor method .
Case Study : Homophily in Wisconsin Antiwar Initiative Petitions , 2005–8 Our primary data source is a series of initiative petitions from campaigns conducted by antiwar activists in Wis- consin from 2005 to 2007 .
During this period , Iraq War opponents , operating through an array of left activist groups , adopted a statewide strategy to gain attention for the antiwar cause , launching a series of petition drives for municipal advisory referenda calling for withdrawal of troops from Iraq .
Under Wisconsin statutes , members of the public may petition for local legislation using a process known as the advisory referendum .
Campaigns 10While this algorithm does not always yield the exact solution to the TSP , it is accurate enough to be used as a benchmark for our purposes .
hoping to place a measure on the ballot must collect sig- natures from a municipality ’ s “ qualified electors ” equal to 15 % of the total number of voters in the most recent gubernatorial election ( Wisconsin Legislative Reference Bureau 2012 ) .
Wisconsin was not the only state in which the antiwar movement petitioned for advisory referenda on the war question , but it is the state with the best available data on how these campaigns were conducted .
By the fullest available accounting of these efforts , some 209 advisory referenda were conducted across the United States dur- ing President George W. Bush ’ s second term .
Forty-three such efforts were launched in Wisconsin , including in Milwaukee , Madison , Racine , La Crosse , and an array of smaller cities and villages .
Similar initiative petition drives occurred in Illinois and Massachusetts.11 The Wisconsin antiwar initiative petitions featured nearly identical format and language .
Figure 2 , for ex- ample , shows one of the 89 petition forms submitted to the city of Baraboo to qualify the initiative .
Each of the 10 lines of the petition ( this was standard across all Wisconsin petitions ) features preformatted space for the petitioner ’ s signature , street address , municipality , and date of signing .
The canvasser affixed her signature and address , attesting to the signatories ’ electoral qualifica- tions .
For each of the 22 municipality-level petition drives , we assembled a database containing all information nec- essary to assemble a two-mode network database .
We sampled a set of petition pages and then geocoded the ad- dresses on each petition page .
In our analyses , we define the primary unit of interest ( the paths of petitioners on any identifiably distinct canvassing effort ) as the petition page-date .
In attempting to capture canvassing behavior , using the petition page alone may mislead because the petitions collected on separate days may represent two different data-generating processes .
Use of page-date en- sures that sequences of petitions analyzed on each page represent a contiguous canvassing effort .
Methods To test our hypotheses , we adopt methods that first clas- sify canvasser strategies and then predict those strategies based on the geographic and social characteristics of the 11As of fall 2008 , when data for this project were first collected , most local governments in Wisconsin had retained copies of the original signature sheets submitted to qualify measures for the ballot and were required , under Wisconsin ’ s Open Public Records Act , to provide these records on public request .
We obtained and geocoded a sample of the petition data for 22 municipalities .
200 CLAYTON NALL , BENJAMIN SCHNEER , AND DANIEL CARPENTER FIGURE 2 Example of an Antiwar Ballot Access Petition from Baraboo , Wisconsin petition signers .
We employ a classification procedure based upon the two key elements we have discussed thus far for reverse engineering the canvasser choice prob- lem .
For each petition page-date , we calculate the dis- tance per signature and the “ route score ” ( the share of possible canvasser signature sequences whose total in- tersignature distance is longer than the route taken ) .
We plot this route score against the average intersignatory distance and define cutting lines that classify as door- to-door any petition where either ( 1 ) the distance be- tween signatures is shorter than 80 % of all possible routes or ( 2 ) the average intersignatory distance is less than 0.25 kilometers.12 Figure 3 illustrates the classification procedure for a set of petitions from the Milwaukee suburb of Wauwatosa .
12In the supporting information , we show the robustness of our results to various classification rules , including only using the route score , lowering the threshold for classifying a petition as walked , and removing outlier signatures .
FIGURE 3 Distinguishing Door-to-Door from Attractor Method Note : This figure displays the relationship between two criteria— route score and distance per signature—jointly used to determine canvassing methods used in Wauwatosa , Wisconsin .
Points that fall within the shaded region are classified as walked .
PATHS OF RECRUITMENT 201 TABLE 1 Effect of Precinct Characteristics on Pr ( Walked ) Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Constant 3.672 3.110 4.024 ( 1.118 ) ( 1.850 ) ( 1.907 ) Urban Pop .
Pct .
0.170 −0.236 −0.542 ( 0.094 ) ( 0.150 ) ( 0.571 ) Nonwhite Pct .
−3.180 −3.129 −2.550 ( 0.509 ) ( 0.899 ) ( 0.700 ) log ( Median HH Inc. ) −0.272 −0.257 −0.452 ( 0.104 ) ( 0.174 ) ( 0.162 ) Obama Vote Share 2008 −0.118 1.889 3.462 ( 0.307 ) ( 1.082 ) ( 0.780 ) Fixed Effects Canvasser Town N 492 470 492 Log Likelihood −489.566 −302.872 −419.207 AIC 989.132 835.744 888.414 Note : Standard errors are in parentheses .
Observations are weighted with inverse probability weights to account for sampling scheme .
A cluster of petitions have very short distances per sig- nature .
At the same time , several evidently door-to-door petitions required more travel per signature but involved extremely efficient routes .
We classify all petitions in the gray shaded area as door-to-door .
After recovering the method taken by each canvasser for each signature , we test the geographic and homophily- related predictions of our formal model using a linear probability model .
In our model , the outcome is rep- resented as a binary variable coded 1 when a door-to- door method was employed .
We include as explanatory covariates the urban share , the median household in- come , the nonwhite share , and the Democratic presiden- tial vote share.13 In accordance with the homophily hy- pothesis ( Hypothesis 2 ) , we anticipate that canvassers will be more likely to choose a door-to-door method as so- cial distance to the next potential signatory decreases .
To test this hypothesis , we estimate the model on its own , with canvasser fixed effects , and with town fixed effects .
Results Table 1 presents the results from the model , which support key aspects of our hypotheses regarding social and geo- graphic distance .
In the first column of results , we observe 13We use the Obama 2008 share of the two-party vote , which was measured after the petition campaign but correlates highly with Democratic vote share from earlier elections .
a strong negative association between a precinct ’ s minor- ity population share and the predominantly white can- vassers ’ tendency to go door-to-door .
White canvassers apparently bear higher social distance costs in nonwhite neighborhoods , prompting them to abandon door-to- door strategies .
Net other considerations , an area ’ s me- dian household income has a negative effect on the prob- ability of going door-to-door .
The effect of Democratic vote share , which might have led liberal canvassers to adopt a door-to-door method , can not be distinguished from zero under the baseline model , though this result arises only after controlling for the other precinct-level characteristics .
The model with canvasser fixed effects illustrates how varying location characteristics predict different choices within each canvasser ’ s effort .
After accounting for the predictive value of the other factors in the regression , we find a negative association between both minority popu- lation share and median household income and door- to-door canvassing .
In this specification , the effect of urban population share reverses .
Overall , we find that canvassers ’ strategy depends on their beliefs about local support for the petition , as proxied by Democratic vote share—a result consistent with the core predictions of our model .
The canvasser is sensitive to social distance costs and rationally targets neighborhoods with higher shares of prospective supporters using door-to-door canvassing .
Our last specification analyzes differences across canvassers within each town .
Again , we find ev- idence for social distance effects .
Democratic vote share is strongly associated with door-to-door petition- ing , whereas nonwhite population share is negatively correlated .
Together , these estimates again suggest that can- vassers go door-to-door in the locations where they expect to find the strongest support for their issue ex ante , and that canvassers refrain from going door-to-door when they face higher social distance costs .
These results hold up for a range of robustness checks .
In Table A-1 in the supporting information , we reesti- mate the model using only the route score , and the re- sults remain unchanged .
The same is true when we use a lower threshold for the route score ( Table A-2 ) ; when we remove outlier signatures to account for cases with incorrect addresses or signers who give a residential ad- dress ( Table A-3 ) ; when we use the route score , which is a continuous variable on the interval [ 0 , 1 ] captur- ing the share of routes shorter than the actual route taken ( Table A-4 ) ; and , finally , when we use an alternate method for determining the location of petitions gathered using an attractor method ( Table A-5 ) .
202 CLAYTON NALL , BENJAMIN SCHNEER , AND DANIEL CARPENTER Case Study : Social and Geographic Distance in Candidate Nominating Papers As a supplement to the antiwar petitions , we examine can- vasser behavior in ballot access petition drives conducted by U.S. Representative Gwen Moore .
Unlike the antiwar initiatives , which are centered on a cause , a candidate ’ s petitions are more likely to be geographically focused on that candidate ’ s “ friends and neighbors ” constituency ( Meredith 2013 ) .
Rep. Moore ’ s case is instructive because her con- stituency expanded shortly before the period we are study- ing .
As a state senator representing predominantly African American Northwest Milwaukee and several adjacent sub- urbs , Moore won the Democratic primary and was easily elected to the House of Representatives in 2004 , and she has been reelected since .
While nearly all of her district is majority Democratic , most of her support comes from her previous constituency , in the overwhelmingly land- slide Democratic African American areas .
Democrats , in- cluding Moore , enjoy more marginal support in the other , predominantly white areas of the district , including the traditionally white ethnic ( mostly Polish ) working-class suburbs of Cudahy and South Milwaukee .
While these neighborhoods regularly elect Democrats to the state leg- islature , the area has historically been opposed to racial integration .
( George Wallace , for example , considered the area one of his strongest bases and visited the area several times during his presidential bids ; Carter 1996 . )
We geocoded the full set of nominating paper signatures ( N = 2 , 260 ) that Moore collected during June 2008 and submitted to the Wisconsin Government Accountability Board.14 Friends-and-neighbors politics means that can- vassers based among the core constituency would have been more likely to collect signatures from their imme- diate neighborhoods and their core constituencies ( an instance of the social distance hypothesis ) .
They face both higher travel costs and variable per-signature costs if they attempt to canvass in a distant , unfamiliar neighbor- hood .
Canvassers should therefore collect signatures in geographically close and politically and socially friendly neighborhoods .
We present a map that clearly demonstrates the geographically and socially bounded search conducted by the Moore canvassers .
Figure 4 displays Wisconsin ’ s 4th Congressional District .
Zip codes are color-coded 14To facilitate rapid coding of the entire set of Moore petitions , we used signatories ’ self-reported zip code to identify their address .
TABLE 2 Predictors of Moore ( WI-4 ) Nominating Paper Signatures , by Zip Code Model 1 Model 2 Constant −54.856 −8.874 ( 8.902 ) ( 17.490 ) Obama Two-Party Share , 2008 95.191 24.782 ( 15.382 ) ( 27.662 ) Canvass Week ( 1–4 ) 4.114 −14.279 ( 1.740 ) ( 6.311 ) Pop .
per Sq .
Mile , 2010 −0.001 −0.001 ( 0.001 ) ( 0.001 ) Obama Share × Week 28.164 ( 9.309 ) N 144 144 R-squared 0.338 0.379 Adj .
R-squared 0.324 0.361 Note : Standard errors are in parentheses .
Observations are weighted with inverse probability weights to account for sampling scheme .
according to Obama ’ s share of the two-party presiden- tial vote in 2008.15 We use dot plots to visualize the dis- tribution of black and white residents within each block group , with each dot representing 100 individuals .
Finally , we display the number of signatures by zip code using a random dot plot within each zip code , each dot represent- ing 10 signatures .
This graph starkly reveals the Moore canvassing effort ’ s limited geographic bounds , which was confined almost entirely to her old state senate district .
Regressing the weekly petition signature count each week on demographic ( Fitch and Ruggles 2003 ) and polit- ical ( Ansolabehere and Rodden 2012 ) variables , we show that canvassers concentrated their efforts on Moore ’ s core constituency and did almost zero canvassing in the dis- trict ’ s more marginal zip codes .
In Table 2 , we demon- strate the importance of neighborhood political support on canvasser targeting .
Model 1 shows that for every 10 additional points in the Obama share of the two-party vote in 2008 , Moore picked up about 10 additional signa- tures in the zip code in any given week .
More importantly , canvassers modified their behavior over time , adopting a strategy that generated more signatures from core areas as the campaign progressed .
In Week 1 , a 90 % Demo- cratic zip code would have been expected to get only 10 more signatures than a 70 % zip code .
By Week 4 , such zip codes were expected to get 27 more signatures .
Over time , the core areas became more important to the can- vass , consistent with the updating described in our model 15We merged precinct-level data from Ansolabehere and Rodden ( 2012 ) with zip code tabulation area ( ZCTA ) data from 2008 .
PATHS OF RECRUITMENT 203 FIGURE 4 Moore Nominating Paper Signatures in WI-4 , Race , and Partisanship Note : This figure displays the high concentration of Moore signers in the predominantly black , and extremely Democratic , neighborhoods of Northwest Milwaukee .
and supporting Hypothesis 3 .
A broad social implication of our model and evidence , then , is that the pursuit of effi- cient campaign strategies will result in petition canvassers neglecting more geographically and socially distant areas within districts .
Stepping back , it would appear that the implications of the Moore campaign ’ s homophily in canvassing led to forfeited opportunities for mobilization .
If the plausible evidence linking petition signing to later participation ( Cruickshank , Edelmann , and Smith 2010 ; John et al .
2013 ; Lee and Hsieh 2013 ; Parry , Smith , and Henry 2012 ) is to be believed , Rep. Moore ’ s campaign lost “ spillover mobilizing opportunities. ” Rep. Moore cleared her signature threshold but did not expand beyond her 204 CLAYTON NALL , BENJAMIN SCHNEER , AND DANIEL CARPENTER core constituency .
Her campaign thus plausibly left on the table both signatures and associated district outreach opportunities .
Case Study : Within-Petition Updating in NYC Antebellum Antislavery Petitions , 1839 Petitions provided antebellum antislavery activists with a legitimated instrument for advancing their cause , with audiences ranging from the communities where petitions were signed to the legislatures and courts that received them .
Canvassers in New York City traversed neighbor- hoods , attended meetings , and laid out petitions while searching for support , but when and how they chose to employ these strategies is less well known .
Data and Methods The source for this case study originates in the winter of 1839 , when the House received and tabled a petition from 603 “ voters ” of New York City pleading for the abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia , in the Florida territory , and in trade among the states.16 Figure 5 displays the petition ’ s prayer , as well as the first few lines of signatures , with addresses .
The second petition , also from the same locales and time period , prayed for congressional recognition of Haiti ( another abolitionist cause ) .
The abolitionists ’ decision to canvass in New York City highlights how canvassers must balance petition yield against local risks .
As Jentz ( 1981 ) notes , a major anti- abolitionist riot , lasting a week , had broken out in 1834 , and the city was subject to unpredictable politics and high mobility .
Yet our uncertainty hypothesis ( Hypothesis 4 ) may suggest one reason why canvassers spent the time and energy they did in gathering signatures .
Compared to known antislavery “ hot spots ” like western New York and Massachusetts where evangelical constituencies could be targeted ( Carpenter and Moore 2014 ) , the value of learning in New York was higher , as less was known about the location of antislavery sympathizers .
And , by virtue of the city ’ s density , large numbers of signatures could be collected at low cost .
The construction of the signatory list marks a key characteristic of the antislavery petitions .
Rather than 16Unlike the many petitions from New York that have received attention in the academic literature , this was a petition signed by men .
Petition of Voters of New York City , tabled February 18 , 1839 ; HR25A-H1.8 , Folder 36 of 38 ; RG 233 , NA .
collecting all signatures at once , groups of canvassers used different sheets of paper at different times , which were then glued together into one long , rolled doc- ument .
Hence , similarly to the individual Wisconsin petition page-dates , this New York antislavery petition can be understood as a collection of smaller canvassing exercises .
We therefore can use each petition page to clas- sify the method used in groups of signatures that were gathered contiguously .
As with the contemporary peti- tions , we can then estimate the incidence of door-to-door versus attractor strategies for individual petition pages and for the petitions as a whole .
Some signatures were gathered by going door-to- door , as the American Antislavery Society recommended to its membership in 1837 ( Jentz 1981 , 103 ) , whereas other historical evidence points to the use of public meetings .
For example , The Emancipator , an antislavery newspaper , reported a meeting held February 2 , 1839 , attended by famed abolitionist Lewis Tappan , who , among many others , signed a petition at the Chatham Street Chapel .
Other Emancipator articles list similar meetings in Lower Manhattan around this time .
Figure 6 displays a map of all signatures from the first petition in lower Manhattan .
The plot confirms that signatures came from multiple neighborhoods , but they also came from households that were relatively close ( easy walking distance ) to the meeting sites .
Results Figure 7 ( a ) shows the distribution of intersignatory dis- tances ( ISD ) for each page of the antislavery petitions .
The median distance per signature is almost 1 kilometer , which is a quite large distance considering that much traf- fic in Manhattan was on foot .
One possible , albeit unlikely , explanation is that canvassers traveled door-to-door over long distances , meeting with failure so frequently that ISD values were large .
More likely , canvassers employed the attractor method for most pages .
The second plot in Figure 7 ( a ) displays the ratio of actual distance trav- eled to the shortest possible distance ( according to the solution to the TSP ) .
Because these petitions were ef- fectively circulated in the same geographic locale , longer distances are more likely to indicate door-to-door can- vassing .
For the petitions we examine here , the median distance is roughly 1.75 times longer than the optimal route , reaching as high as four times greater than the optimal route .
By obtaining the distribution of distances of all pos- sible routes , we may identify whether a route is short in relation to all other possible routes .
Figure 7 ( b ) provides PATHS OF RECRUITMENT 205 FIGURE 5 1839 Antislavery Petition , New York City Note : This figure displays the prayer from the 1839 antislavery petition canvassed in Lower Manhattan .
an example of the approach .
The first plot displays information gathered from the ninth page ( subpetition ) of the 1839 antislavery petition .
The canvasser collected signatures from 13 citizens , who listed 12 unique ad- dresses .
The sequence of distances between each location was 20.81kilometers—almost three times greater than the optimal path according to the TSP nearest-neighbor algorithm .
Furthermore , the actual route between points is longer than 93 % of all possible routes , strongly suggest- ing that the attractor method was adopted .
The second plot , drawn from the 14th page of the petition , suggests a different story .
This page contained nine signatures , each listing a unique address .
The distance between these points if the canvasser traveled according to the solution to the TSP is 5 kilometers ; the distance traveled for the actual route taken is just over 7 kilometers .
To help assess , in relative terms , the route distance , we also compare the route taken to the full distribution of distances for possible routes .
In this case , the route taken is shorter than 96.12 % of all possible routes .
Our classification method indicates that the canvasser walked this petition page .
We repeat this procedure for each page of the pe- titions and apply the same rule as before for classifying FIGURE 6 Geographic Location of Signatures , Lower Manhattan Note : This figure displays the locations of all signatures with addresses in Lower Manhattan .
It also displays the location ( large plus signs ) of local meeting places where we believe petitions were laid out .
206 CLAYTON NALL , BENJAMIN SCHNEER , AND DANIEL CARPENTER FIGURE 7 Assessing Walked vs. Attractor Strategies in NYC ( a ) KM per Signature by Page ( d ) ( c ) Distribution of All Route Distances for Page of Distribution of All Route Distances for Page of ( b ) Note : This figure displays our approach to determining whether a petition page was circulated door-to-door or according to an attractor method .
Panel ( a ) displays the distribution of distance traveled per signature for each page of the two antislavery petitions , as well as the ratio of distance actually traveled to distance traveled under the nearest-neighbor TSP solution .
Panels ( b ) and ( c ) display the relationship between the solution to the TSP , the distance of the route taken , and the distribution of all possible distances for two different pages from an 1839 antislavery petition canvassed in Lower Manhattan .
Panel ( d ) exhibits the relationship between two of our criteria for determining canvassing method .
Points that fall within the area of the shaded region are classified as walked .
the strategy taken for each page .
Figure 7 ( d ) displays a plot of these two criteria for our first antislavery petition .
We classify the petition pages that fall within the shaded gray area as following a door-to-door method .
Restricting the data to only petition pages canvassed door-to-door allows us to test additional predictions from the formal model .
We evaluate Hypothesis 3—that termi- nation of canvassing grows more likely as the signature rate in a locale declines ( i.e. , as ISD increases ) .
In this empirical setup , each signature on a petition page is an observation .
The last signature on a petition page marks the point at which the canvasser quit.17 We estimate a fixed effects logit model in which the odds of quitting af- ter gathering a given signature depend on lagged measures 17Note that petition pages were long pieces of paper that could contain many signatures , and so we do not treat space on a page as a constraint .
of intersignature distance .
The model includes petition- page fixed effects , so that the estimates result from varia- tion within distinct petition-pages .
Put simply , the model predicts when a canvasser will quit based on her recent experiences searching for signatories .
Table 3 presents odds ratios estimated using this ap- proach.18 In Specification 1 , we estimate the relationship between the quitting indicator variable and lagged ISD , and we find that an increase of 1 kilometer in distance traveled to gather an additional signature is associated with increasing the odds of a canvasser quitting by more than one and a half times .
We find an association of simi- lar magnitude when examining the relationship between termination of canvassing and the distance between the 18We present the logit coefficients in Table A-7 of the supporting information .
PATHS OF RECRUITMENT 207 TABLE 3 Odds Ratios : Effect of Intersignatory Distance on Pr ( Quitting ) Walked Petitions Only Both Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 ISDt−1 1.657 ( 0.228 ) ISDt−2 1.995 ( 0.292 ) ISDt−3 0.940 ( 0.546 ) ( ISDt−1+ISDt−2 2 ) 2.555 ( 0.523 ) WALK × ( ISDt−1+ISDt−2 2 ) 2.555 ( 0.523 ) ATTRACT × ( ISDt−1+ISDt−2 2 ) 0.939 ( 0.445 ) Number of Petition Pages 24 24 24 24 48 N 309 286 264 286 573 R-squared 0.021 0.031 0.0001 0.037 0.019 Note : Standard errors are in parentheses .
Models 1–4 are estimated using walked petitions only .
Model 5 includes all petitions .
Model 5 includes only interactions since the base terms are subsumed in the petition-page fixed effects .
Null value for odds ratio estimates is one .
signature from one period and the signature from two periods ago ( in Specification 2 ) .
Specification 3 , which considers the distance between the signature from two periods ago and three periods ago , does not illustrate the same relationship and instead results in a null effect .
The period-to-period behavior of canvassers seems to depend primarily on their experience in the previous two periods .
According to Specification 4 , taking the moving average over the last two intersignatory distances produces a sim- ilar , but even larger , relationship .
Finally , when we pool the data across all petition pages ( both walked and laid out ) and estimate heterogeneous effects , the relationship between lagged distance traveled and quitting holds only for the walked petitions , consistent with our predictions from the model .
Intersignatory distance for an attractor method should have no bearing on quitting because the canvasser is not the one bearing the cost of traveling.19 The empirical results presented in Table 3 support the dynamic locale switching hypothesis ( Hypothesis 3 ) from our theoretical model .
Failed attempts to get signatures lead to diminished expectations about the next period and higher odds of quitting .
19In the supporting information , Tables A-8 through A-10 illustrate the results are robust to changes such as classifying petitions as walked using only the route score , lowering the route score cutoff threshold for a walked petition , and omitting outlier signatures .
Conclusion Analysis of petitions can contribute both theoretical rigor and empirical granularity to the study of political re- cruitment .
Recruiters always perform their prospecting work sequentially , as not every prospect can be solicited at once .
Petitions provide an archive of the sequences in which a recruiter ’ s successes were experienced and recorded .
In cases where other data are available on the signatories—for instance , in the associated address data examined in our empirical cases—the analyst can learn much about the “ revealed ” strategies adopted by the can- vasser in recruiting signatories to her cause.20 We find that prospecting is indeed rational , but in ways that earlier models did not specify and that empir- ical analyses , because they lacked data on sequential be- havior and learning , did not observe .
Critically , we show that prospectors exhibit homophily , learn over time , and adjust within locales , adapting their strategies at each step of an arduous recruitment process .
The recruiter in our dynamic prospecting model is embedded in a geographic and social space .
This point about recruiters has rarely appeared in existing , survey-based approaches since na- tional cross-sectional survey data are poorly suited to 20See , for example , the rich social status data developed by Tulchin ( 2010 ) in his study of petitioning and the emergence of Protes- tantism in sixteenth-century France .
208 CLAYTON NALL , BENJAMIN SCHNEER , AND DANIEL CARPENTER capturing the social milieus in which organizational re- cruiting , canvassing , and voter mobilization occur .
Our purpose in this article is not to suggest the final word on the subject , and our findings suggest additional research opportunities .
For instance , consider the hypothesis of social distance influencing canvassing .
One could imagine an experiment in which a white neighborhood is canvassed by different political activists , with canvassers of different social groups randomly assigned to starting locations of different types .
Their dynamic canvassing behavior could be directly observed , and the hypothesized source of variation in canvasser behavior—social distance—would be randomly as- signed .
The implications of our model would appear not just in petition data , but could also be measured by tracking canvasser activity .
Indeed , further research should attempt to clarify how recruiters learn and adapt .
For now , the evidence in support of Hypothesis 3 comes in the form of a two-period moving average of intersignatory distance .
Depending on the locale , this function may take quite different forms .
So too , observational and experimental tests of our uncertainty-variance hypothesis ( Hypothesis 4 ) should be undertaken to identify the extent to which recruiters incorporate the “ option value ” of their next solicitation .
To be sure , not all forms of petitioning or mobiliza- tion fit our model , and online mobilization presents one challenge to our way of describing the canvass .
In elec- tronic recruiting , a canvasser will find it easy to generate multiple solicitations at a time , as when an electronic mes- sage is sent to dozens or hundreds of people simultane- ously by including them in the carbon copy line , or when a message is posted on a website or a social media platform .
At the same time , electronic recruiting typically has a very low yield .
Even in these cases , our analyses suggest that it may be possible to observe the sequence of signatures , which may tell us something about the order in which re- cruiters win the assent of particular types of supporters .
With other available data on electronic social networks , it may be possible to trace the electronic diffusion of a petition through online media , where the “ canvassing ” strategy and its efficacy will depend as much upon whom the next prospect knows as on what the canvasser does .
Person-to-person petitions signed with ink will un- doubtedly remain an important part of plebiscitary and representative politics for years to come .
Understanding canvassing as dynamic social prospecting , and focusing analytic attention upon the sequences revealed in ob- served signatory lists , provides insights into the ever- evolving process by which the frontline workers of po- litical campaigns elicit support .
References Ansolabehere , Stephen , and Jonathan Rodden .
2012 .
“ Harvard Election Data Archive. ” Data file .
http : //projects .
iq.harvard.edu/eda .
Applegate , David L. , Robert E. Bixby , Vasek Chvatal , and William J. Cook .
2011 .
The Traveling Salesman Problem : A Computational Study .
Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press .
Banks , Jeffrey S. , and Rangarajan K. Sundaram .
1992 .
“ Denumerable-Armed Bandits. ” Econometrica : Journal of the Econometric Society 60 ( 5 ) : 1071–96 .
Bellman , Richard .
1957 .
Dynamic Programming .
Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press .
Bertsekas , Dimitri P. , and Steven Eugene Shreve .
1996 .
Stochas- tic Optimal Control : The Discrete Time Case .
Belmont , MA : Athena Scientific .
Brady , Henry E. , Kay Lehman Schlozman , and Sidney Verba .
1999 .
“ Prospecting for Participants : Rational Expectations and the Recruitment of Political Activists. ” American Politi- cal Science Review 93 ( 1 ) : 153–68 .
Carpenter , Daniel , and Colin D. Moore .
2014 .
“ When Can- vassers Became Activists : Antislavery Petitioning and the Political Mobilization of American Women. ” American Po- litical Science Review 108 ( 3 ) : 479–98 .
Carter , Daniel T. 1996 .
“ Legacy of Rage : George Wallace and the Transformation of American Politics. ” Journal of Southern History 62 ( 1 ) : 3–26 .
Cruickshank , Peter , Noella Edelmann , and Colin F. Smith .
2010 .
“ Signing an E-Petition as a Transition from Lurking to Par- ticipation. ” In Electronic Government and Electronic Par- ticipation , ed .
J. Chappellet , et al. , Linz , Austria : Trauner , 275–82 .
Enos , Ryan , Anthony Fowler , and Lynn Vavreck .
2014 .
“ In- creasing Inequality : The Effect of GOTV Mobilization on the Composition of the Electorate. ” Journal of Politics 76 ( 1 ) : 273–88 .
Enos , Ryan , and Eitan D. Hersh .
2015 .
“ Party Activists as Cam- paign Advertisers : The Ground Game as a Principal-Agent Problem. ” American Political Science Review 109 ( 2 ) : 252–78 .
Fitch , Catherine A. , and Steven Ruggles .
2003 .
“ Building the National Historical Geographic Information System. ” His- torical Methods 36 ( 1 ) : 41–51 .
Gerber , Alan S. , and Donald P. Green .
2000 .
“ The Effects of Canvassing , Telephone Calls , and Direct Mail on Voter Turnout : A Field Experiment. ” American Political Science Review 94 ( 3 ) : 653–63 .
Gittins , J. C. 1989 .
Multi-armed Bandit Allocation Indices .
Wiley- Interscience Series in Systems and Optimization .
Chichester : Wiley .
Han , Hahrie .
2016 .
“ The Organizational Roots of Political Ac- tivism : Field Experiments on Creating a Relational Context. ” American Political Science Review 110 ( 2 ) : 296–307 .
Heaney , Michael T. , and Fabio Rojas .
2007 .
“ Partisans , Non- partisans , and the Antiwar Movement in the United States. ” American Politics Research 35 ( 4 ) : 431–64 .
Jentz , John B .
1981 .
“ The Antislavery Constituency in Jackso- nian New York City. ” Civil War History 27 ( 2 ) : 101–22 .
PATHS OF RECRUITMENT 209 John , Peter , Sarah Cotterill , Liz Richardson , Alice Moseley , Gerry Stoker , Graham Smith , Corinne Wales , Hanhua Liu , and Hisako Nomura .
2013 .
Nudge , Nudge , Think , Think : Ex- perimenting with Ways to Change Civic Behaviour .
London : Bloomsbury Academic .
Lee , Yu-Hao , and Gary Hsieh .
2013 .
“ Does Slacktivism Hurt Activism ?
The Effects of Moral Balancing and Consis- tency in Online Activism. ” In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 811–20 .
McAdam , Douglas .
1986 .
“ Recruitment to High-Risk Activism : The Case of Freedom Summer. ” American Journal of Sociol- ogy 92 ( 1 ) : 64–90 .
Meredith , Marc .
2013 .
“ Exploiting ‘ Friends and Neighbors ’ to Estimate Coattail Effects. ” American Political Science Review 107 ( 4 ) : 742–65 .
Mickey , Robert .
2015 .
Paths out of Dixie : The Democratization of Authoritarian Enclaves in America ’ s Deep South , 1944–1972 .
Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press .
Parry , Janine A. , Daniel A. Smith , and Shayne Henry .
2012 .
“ The Impact of Petition Signing on Voter Turnout. ” Political Behavior 34 ( 1 ) : 117–36 .
Rosenstone , Steven , and John M. Hansen .
1993 .
Mobiliza- tion , Participation and Democracy in America .
New York : Macmillan .
Wisconsin Legislative Reference Bureau .
2012 .
Initiative , Ref- erendum , and Recall in Wisconsin .
Brief 12-1 .
Madison : Wisconsin Legislative Reference Bureau .
Tulchin , Allan .
2010 .
That Men Would Praise the Lord : The Triumph of Protestantism in Nı̂mes , 1530–1570 .
New York : Oxford University Press .
Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher ’ s website : Supporting Information S1 : Supporting Information in- cludes the formal model and all proofs , as well as robust- ness checks with alternative models estimated upon the data .
