Namkoong_JournExpSocPsych_2016_rvb.pdf
aKluNtDJ5_HSOv4AyB41MLNsV5Ba-Namkoong_JournExpSocPsych_2016_rvb.pdf.plain.html

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Experimental Social Psychology j ourna l homepage : www.e lsev ie r .com/ locate / j espWanting a bird 's eye to understand why : Motivated abstraction and causal uncertaintyJae-Eun Namkoong a , ⁎ , Marlone D. Henderson b a Managerial Sciences Department , The University of Nevada , N. Virginia Street MS 0028 , Reno , Nevada 89557 , USA b Department of Psychology , The University of Texas , 108 E. Dean Keeton Stop A8000 , Austin , TX 78712-1043 , USA H I G H L I G H T S • Causal uncertainty activates a goal to think abstractly .
• Causal uncertainty increases resumption to interrupted abstract thinking task .
• Abstract thinking task completion leads to post-fulfillment decrease in motivation.⁎ Corresponding author .
E-mail addresses : jnamkoong @ unr.edu ( J.-E. Namkoon marlone.henderson @ utexas.edu ( M.D .
Henderson ) .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2016.01.014 0022-1031/© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.a b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f oArticle history : Received 15 October 2014 Revised 29 January 2016 Accepted 29 January 2016 Available online 2 February 2016When negative events occur ( e.g. , a breakup , a mass shooting ) , people naturally ask themselveswhy such things happen .
Recent research has shown that more abstract thinking about negative events fosters less uncertainty about why those events happened .
The present research examined a downstream consequence of this effect , namely , whether causal uncertainty activates a goal to think more abstractly .
We drew on principles of goal ac- tivation , to show that after leading participants to feel more uncertain about a negative event , they were more likely to resume an experience that afforded an opportunity to thinkmore abstractly ( i.e. , focusing on similarities rather thandifferences ; Experiments 1A and 1B ) .
In further support of ourmotivational framework , we also show that after leadingparticipants to feelmoreuncertain about a negative event , they no longer exhibited amore pos- itive attitude toward an experience that afforded an opportunity to think more abstractly once they had the op- portunity to actually engage inmore abstract thinking ( Experiment 2 ) .
Theoretical and practical implications are discussed .
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Keywords : Causal uncertainty Abstract thinking Motivated cognition Goal pursuit1 .
Introduction “ Think left and think right and think low and think high .
Oh , the thinks you can think up if only you try. ” [ From the book “ Oh , the Thinks You Can Think ! ” by Dr. Seuss ] People are often motivated to achieve a variety of goals , including behavioral and performance standards ( Gollwitzer & Brandstätter , 1997 ) , emotional states ( Gross & John , 2003 ) , and general feelings of competence and belonging ( Reis , Sheldon , Gable , Roscoe , & Ryan , g ) ,2000 ) .
Cognitive processes certainly play a key role in such goal pur- suits .
Indeed , research on motivated reasoning shows that people may strive to arrive at certain conclusions , which allows them to think what they want to think ( Kunda , 1990 ) .
Furthermore , as the opening quote illustrates , people can also be motivated to think in a certain way ( Gollwitzer & Bayer , 1999 ; Kruglanski & Webster , 1996 ; Neuberg , 1989 ) .
The present research tests whether the experience of causal un- certaintymotivates people to think at a higher , more abstract level .
Spe- cifically , we test key motivational principles established in the goal literature to examine people 's pursuit and fulfillment of an abstract thinking goal.1.1 .
Motivated cognition The field of motivation is mainly concerned with the activation and pursuit of goals , and the consequences of goal pursuit ( Elliot & Thrash , 58 J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–712002 ; Ferguson & Bargh , 2004 ; Fitzsimons , Chartrand , & Fitzsimons , 2008 ; Gollwitzer & Moskowitz , 1996 ; Hassin , Aarts , Eitam , Custers , & Kleiman , 2009 ) .
Much of this research focuses on tangible goals ( for re- view , see Gollwitzer & Moskowitz , 1996 ) .
For example , motivation re- searchers commonly deal with goals that center on things such as reducing unhealthy food consumption ( Papies , Stroebe , & Aarts , 2008 ) , promoting prosocial behavior ( Weinstein & Ryan , 2010 ) , foster- ing academic success ( Fishbach , Friedman , & Kruglanski , 2003 ) , and even engaging in sexual intercourse ( Aarts , Gollwitzer , & Hassin , 2004 ) .
Of course , social psychologists have also long been interested in examining less tangible goals , including what we will refer to throughout this article as thinking goals ( Andrade , 2005 ; Hauser-Cram , Sirin , & Stipek , 2003 ) .
Thinking goals are desired cog- nitive states associated with certain thought content or processes .
Thinking goals , as they relate to thought content , refer to what peo- ple want to think .
Motivated reasoning is a manifestation of these goals as it “ concerns the outcome of a given reasoning task ” ( Kunda , 1990 , p. 480 ) .
For example , people often change their atti- tudes to match their behavior to reduce cognitive dissonance ( Elliot & Devine , 1994 ; Festinger , 1957 ) .
People also tend to be wish- ful thinkers who feel motivated to have positive illusions and expec- tations about themselves , others , and the world ( Campbell & Sedikides , 1999 ; Crocker & Luhtanen , 1990 ; Lerner , 1980 ; Murray & Holmes , 1997 ; Weinstein , 1980 ) .
At other times , people may be mo- tivated to lower the perceived value or importance of objects and events ( Taber & Lodge , 2006 ; Veling , Holland , & van Knippenberg , 2008 ) .
Most germane to our research are thinking goals related tomodes of thinking , which reflect how people want to think .
Indeed , studies have shown that people can be motivated to think in different ways .
For in- stance , people can be motivated to quickly seize definite answers ( Kruglanski & Webster , 1996 ) , be free of biases ( Neuberg , 1989 ) , think deliberately ( Gollwitzer & Bayer , 1999 ) , and be creative and open- minded ( Fitzsimons et al. , 2008 ) .
Since having a goal to think a certain way relates to a process of thinking , it is relatively free of what the end-product of the thought processmay be .
To illustrate , consider a per- son who recently ended a romantic relationship .
She may have learned from similar past experiences that occupying hermindwith distractions helps keep her sad feelings at bay .
Thus , her breakup would activate a goal to be distracted .
While her thinking goal ( distracting oneself ) re- mains constant , the specific content of the goal pursuit could manifest in many forms ( e.g. , suddenly gaining an interest in baseball , becoming curious about the etiology of words ) .
Similarly , the present research ex- plores the pursuit of a goal to think in a certain way , namely , more abstractly .
Regardless of whether motivated cognition relates to a particular content or a way of thinking , it can have meaningful effects on people 's attention and perception ( Balcetis & Dunning , 2006 , 2007 ; Bradley et al. , 2003 ; Veltkamp , Aarts , & Custers , 2008 ) , memory ( Dijksterhuis , van Knippenberg , Kruglanski , & Schaper , 1996 ; Lemay & Neal , 2013 ; Shu , Gino , & Bazerman , 2011 ) , information pro- cessing ( De Dreu , Koole , & Oldersma , 1999 ; Ditto , Scepansky , Munro , Apanovitch , & Lockhart , 1998 ; Taber & Lodge , 2006 ) , social interac- tions ( De Grada , Kruglanski , Mannetti , & Pierro , 1999 ) , attitudes and judgments ( Chernev , 2001 ; Fazio , Zanna , & Cooper , 1977 ; Lerner & Simmons , 1966 ) , and decision-making ( De Dreu , Nijstad , & van Knippenberg , 2008 ; Verplanken & Holland , 2002 ) .
As highlighted here , prior research on motivated cognition has mainly examined its consequences .
The present research aims to move beyond past work by examining more deeply what it means for a thinking style to be motivated .
Specif- ically , we explore whether principles of goal pursuit apply to people 's goal to think in a more abstract way .
As far as we know , the present re- search is the first to directly use key experimental paradigms of motiva- tional principles to test the activation and fulfillment of a goal to adopt a mode of thinking.1.2 .
Motivation to abstract Recently , we investigated the role that abstraction plays in reduc- ing causal uncertainty ( Namkoong & Henderson , 2014 ) .
A basic property of human cognition is that individuals can mentally repre- sent or construe objects and events at different levels of abstraction ( Burgoon , Henderson , & Markman , 2013 ) .
Higher-level , more ab- stract construals tend to be relatively simpler and more cohesive than lower-level , more concrete construals ( Reyna , 2012 ; Trope & Liberman , 2011 ; Vallacher & Wegner , 1987 ) .
This is because higher-level construals of objects and events emphasize superordi- nate , central features and omit incidental features without significantly changing the meaning of events .
For example , constru- ing a relationship conflict more abstractly would likely involve thinking about more essential , defining aspects of the conflict ( e.g. , incompatible personality traits that endure over time , or a gen- eral theme that emerges consistently across arguments ) , whereas a more concrete construal would highlight idiosyncratic details about the conflict ( e.g. , when or where it occurred , or the particulars of how it differs from other conflicts ) .
People are at times motivated to think in a more abstract way .
For example , people tend to make more global dispositional attributions to explain positive outcomes of their actions , but more situational and context-specific attributions for negative outcomes .
This bias is largely based on one 's motivation to view the self in a more positive light ( for reviews , see Campbell & Sedikides , 1999 ; Mezulis , Abramson , Hyde , & Hankin , 2004 ) .
Similar to this self-serving bias , people may be motivated to generalize favorable aspects of their ingroups and negative aspects of their outgroups ( Maass , Salvi , Arcuri , & Semin , 1989 ) .
These effects are partly explained by a highly salient protective motivation toward ingroups ( Maass , Ceccarelli , & Rudin , 1996 ; Maass , Milesi , Zabbini , & Stahlberg , 1995 ) .
In the pres- ent research , we explore another factor that may motivate people to think more abstractly , namely , when people feel uncertain about causal relationships .
1.3 .
Causal uncertainty as a trigger for an abstraction goal Negative life events , such as a breakup , often baffle people because they are difficult tomake sense of .
One of the first questions people nat- urally ask themselves in these circumstances iswhy such things happen ( Wong & Weiner , 1981 ) .
Indeed , the desire to understand causal rela- tionships is such a powerful motive that the lack of understanding can produce a host of negative consequences .
For example , research shows that causal uncertainty is associated with social anxiety , depres- sion , and low self-esteem ( Boucher & Jacobson , 2012 ; Edwards , Weary , & Reich , 1998 ) .
Prior work has examined the role that causal uncertainty plays in cognitive processing .
Specifically , this work has highlighted the cogni- tive strategies people adopt in order to improve their causal under- standing ( for a review , see Weary , Tobin , & Edwards , 2010 ) .
For example , people who are chronically uncertain about causes and who place high importance on causal understanding tend to examine causal explanations more carefully ( Tobin & Weary , 2008 ; Weary & Jacobson , 1997 ) .
People with high causal uncertainty are also better at adjusting for cognitive heuristics and biases , such as the availability heuristic and correspondence bias ( Vaughn & Weary , 2003 ; Weary , Vaughn , Stewart , & Edwards , 2006 ) .
Recently , Helzer and Edwards ( 2012 ) found that causal uncertainty activates an abstract construal , presumably because of people 's desire to restore a sense of certainty .
Extending their work , Namkoong and Henderson ( 2014 ) showed that an abstract construal indeed re- duces experiences of causal uncertainty .
Together , these findings suggest that causal uncertainty may motivate people to construe events more abstractly .
Namkoong and Henderson ( 2014 ) provided indirect evidence for how an abstract thinking goal can originate in 59J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71the first place under circumstances associated with high causal un- certainty .
Indeed , it is possible that , over time , people repeatedly benefit from more abstract thinking when experiencing causal un- certainty .
And , as a result , people would develop a positive associa- tion between causal uncertainty and a more abstract way of thinking .
Because of this positive association , experiencing causal uncertainty may activate a goal to think more abstractly .
The find- ings of Helzer and Edwards ( 2012 ) imply that many individuals who experience causal uncertainty may activate , and ultimately ful- fill , a goal to thinkmore abstractly .
Taken together , previous research hints at the motivational process underlying the relationship be- tween causal uncertainty and abstract thinking .
The present research directly tests the pursuit of a goal to think in a more abstract way , triggered by causal uncertainty .
By doing so , the research presented in this article makes several important con- tributions to the literature .
First , we provide a theoretical mecha- nism that integrates the findings of Helzer and Edwards ( 2012 ) and Namkoong and Henderson ( 2014 ) to provide a more complete picture of the role that abstraction plays in causal uncertainty .
Spe- cifically , we examine the motivational consequences of causal un- certainty both before and after people have an opportunity to actually think more abstractly , and extend the literature onmotivat- ed abstraction by introducing an important antecedent , namely , causal uncertainty .
Second , we contribute more broadly to the field of motivated cognition , by directly testing the motivational proper- ties of a thinking goal .
To test our theory that causal uncertainty ac- tivates a goal to think in a more abstract way , the following experiments rely on established guidelines for distinguishing moti- vational from non-motivational effects ( Bargh , Gollwitzer , Lee-Chai , Barndollar , & Trötschel , 2001 ; Förster , Liberman , & Friedman , 2007 ; Martin & Tesser , 2009 ) .
2 .
Experiment 1A The first experiment used the task interruption and resumption paradigm taken from the self-regulation literature ( Bargh et al. , 2001 ; Förster et al. , 2007 ) to test our theory that causal uncertainty activates a goal to think more abstractly .
A key characteristic of goal pursuit is the high rate of task resumption after disruption ( Bargh et al. , 2001 ; Gollwitzer & Liu , 1995 ; Weiner , 1965 ) .
That is , when people are interrupted while pursuing a goal , they want to re- turn and complete the goal .
For example , Bargh et al .
( 2001 ) found that participants who were primed with a high-performance goal ( vs. no goal ) during a word puzzle task were more likely to reengage ( rather thanmove on to amore enjoyable task ) after the word puzzle had been disrupted .
Similarly , we hypothesized that participants who experienced high ( vs. low ) causal uncertainty would be more likely to resume a task after being interrupted if the task afforded the opportunity to think in a more abstract way .
In fact , we predicted that heightened causal uncertainty would lead people to resume a task that affords more abstract thinking , but not a task that affords more concrete thinking , even when people could choose to complete a more enjoy- able task .
2.1 .
Method Eighty-five University of Texas undergraduate students ( 40 females ; Mage = 19.67 , SDage = 1.03 ) participated in this experiment for course credit.1 The experiment relied on a 2 ( causal uncertainty : high vs.1 Sample sizes were determined based on the availability of subject pool resources.low ) × 2 ( task construal : abstract vs. concrete ) between-participants design .
2.1.1 .
Manipulation of uncertainty At the beginning of the session , we told participants that there would be a total of three independent parts to the survey ( each lasting for 2 min ) .
Specifically , we told them that they would engage in a Rela- tionship Conflict Task , a Picture Impression Task , and a Humor Evalua- tion Task ( in this order ) .
See Appendix A for the descriptions of the tasks .
In the Relationship Conflict Task , participants recalled a relationship conflict and described it with either high or low casual uncertainty .
Fol- lowing the procedure of Namkoong and Henderson ( 2014 ; Experiment 1 ) , we asked participants to either write about aspects of the conflict that they still had difficulty understanding in terms of why it happened ( high causal uncertainty condition ) or aspects that they now under- stood very well ( low causal uncertainty condition ) .
Specifically , we used the following instructions ( low causal uncertainty instructions in parentheses ) : A lot of times , conflicts happen and people do n't understand why they happened .
Other times , conflicts happen and people fully un- derstand why they happened .
For your particular conflict , what are some aspects of this conflict that you have a very difficult time under- standing ( clear understanding ) in terms of why they happened ?
What things about it do you still not really understand ( understand re- ally well ) ?
To verify the effectiveness of our manipulation , we created a composite of participants ' causal uncertainty by averaging their re- sponses ( r = .54 , p b .0001 ) to two 7-point items ( “ I feel like I have a very good understanding about the conflict. ” and “ I feel like there are many things about this conflict that I still do n't fully under- stand. ” [ reverse-coded ] ; 1 = Strongly disagree , 7 = Strongly agree ) .
2.1.2 .
Task construal and interruption After manipulating and measuring causal uncertainty , we direct- ed participants to an allegedly unrelated survey titled the Picture Impression Task .
Here , we randomly assigned participants to either “ Focus on Similarities ” or “ Focus on Differences ” between pairs of pictures .
Focusing on similarities between things fosters thinking at a more abstract level , whereas focusing on differences between things fosters thinking at a more concrete level ( Fujita & Roberts , 2010 ; also see Burgoon et al. , 2013 ) .
Indeed , a more abstract con- strual involves ignoring or assimilating details to create a simpler , more coherent representation of events ( Liberman , Sagristano , & Trope , 2002 ) For example , when thinking about a person enjoying a picnic at the park and another person doing homework in the li- brary , identifying a common thread between the two events may re- quire considerations of more abstract values and goals ( e.g. , “ they are both engaged in activities that promote their overall well- being ” ) while ignoring lower-level details about each event ( e.g. , “ the former event took place at the park , and the latter event in the library ” ) .
In the Picture Impression Task , as the first pair of pictures started to load and when participants could only see the very top portion of the pictures , we abruptly interrupted participants with an unrelated task .
The top portion of the pictures had no information so partici- pants were unable to identify the content of the pictures and thus unable to experience a shift in construal level ( see Appendix B ) .
We interrupted participants with a typing task that supposedly measured their natural typing speed as a part of the survey data col- lection process .
We emphasized that the sudden interruption was important for capturing their natural typing habits .
Forty-nine 60 J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71nonsense words appeared on the screen with an instruction that said “ Type all nonsense words accurately in your natural speed. ” It was important for us to insert an interruption that preoccupied par- ticipants ' cognitive attention , as wewere concerned that abstraction could be achieved by some participants via spontaneous thought ( see Helzer & Edwards , 2012 ) .
The screens that we presented to participants for the task interruption procedure are shown in Appendix B .
2.1.3 .
Task resumption The dependent variable of this experiment was the proportion of participants who decided to resume the interrupted task .
After par- ticipants finished typing all nonsense words , they continued to the next screen where they could select to either resume the interrupted Picture Impression Task , or switch to the Humor Evaluation Task in- stead .
We described the Humor Evaluation Task as involving reading and evaluating humorous stories ( see Appendix A for the full de- scription ) .
We clearly stated that they could only complete one of the two remaining tasks .
To ensure that the perceived duration and required effort of each task did not influence participants ' choice , we reminded them again that both tasks would last 2 min , and even told them that each task consisted of the same number of epi- sodes ( 5 pairs of pictures for the former , and 5 humorous stories for the latter ) .
2.1.4 .
Pilot test for construal manipulation check To confirm the notion that focusing on similarities ( vs. differ- ences ) is considered by participants as affording more abstract thinking , we ran a separate pilot test as a manipulation check .
Ninety-seven University of Texas undergraduate students enrolled in psychology courses participated in this test .
Except for not having the causal uncertainty manipulation , the procedure of the pilot study was the same as the main study ( Experiment 1A ) .
Specifically , par- ticipants in the pilot study were told they would be completing two tasks , namely the “ Picture Impression Task ” and the “ Humor Evaluation Task , ” and they expected each to last 2 min .
Then , they were randomly assigned to either the similarity focus condition or the difference focus condition , as in the main experiment .
The de- scriptions used to explain the Picture Impression Task were also identical to those used in the main experiment .
Then , as in the main experiment , participants were interrupted as the pictures began to load , but instead of the nonsense word typing task , they were shown manipulation check questions .
The manipulation check questions were created based on the ab- straction literature .
Abstract ( vs. concrete ) cognitive processing re- quires identifying central meaning and underlying reasons behind events , and finding overarching themes and general patterns ( for a re- view , see Burgoon et al. , 2013 ; Trope & Liberman , 2003 , 2011 ) .
Thus , we asked participants “ to what extent do you think the Picture Impres- sion Task – finding similarities ( differences ) across pairs of pictures – that you are about to dowill require you to do the following ?
( 1=not at all , 7 = very much ) ” Below this question , participants saw the following items : “ Focusing on the essence or central meaning of the pictures ; Thinking about the fundamental reason behind the actions in each pic- ture ; Thinkingmore abstractly about the pictures ; Looking for overarch- ing themes between pictures ; Thinking at amore general level ; Looking for patterns in the pictures. ” The six itemswere averaged to form a singlemeasure ( α= .77 ) , and we used this measure to examinewhether participants in the similarity focus condition found the Picture Impression Task to afford more ab- stract thinking than those in the difference focus condition .
Note that , as in the main experiment , participants did not actually engage in the Picture Impression Task ; they simply saw a description of the task and then were interrupted to answer the manipulation check questions .
Also following the design of the main experiment , the pilot test was a between-participants design , so they evaluated either the similarity-focus task , or the difference-focus task , but not both .
As predicted , an in- dependent t-test revealed that participants in the similarity focus condi- tion thought the Picture Impression Task would evoke more abstract thinking ( M = 5.34 , SD = .88 ) compared to those in the difference focus condition ( M = 4.35 , SD = 1.11 ; t ( 95 ) = 4.83 , p b 0.0001 , d = .98 ) .2.1.5 .
Pilot test to rule out alternative explanations We conducted another pilot study to rule out potential alterna- tive explanations related to perceived task enjoyment and effort .
We wanted to ensure that the Humor Evaluation Task was indeed perceived as a more enjoyable alternative and would be chosen at a higher rate if people 's goal to think abstractly was not activated .
We also wanted to make sure that people experiencing high causal uncertainty were not simply choosing an easier task ( as opposed to a task that afforded more abstract thinking ) .
So , in this pilot study , we asked participants how enjoyable and difficult they thought each task would be .
Forty-eight University of Texas undergraduate students ( 30 females ; Mage = 21.04 , SDage = 1.18 ) participated in the pilot study .
For each task ( similarity-focused Picture Impression Task , difference-focused Picture Impression Task , and Humor Evalu- ation Task ) , participants first read the task description ( identical to what was used in the main experiment ; see Appendix A ) , then rated on 7-point scales how difficult they anticipated the task to be , and how fun or enjoyable they anticipated the task to be .
We ran- domized the order of the evaluated tasks .
To analyze the pilot data , we ran a series of paired t-tests .
We first examined the anticipated difficulty associated with each task .
Partici- pants thought that the similarity-focused Picture Impression Task ( M = 2.85 , SD = 1.53 ) would be significantly more difficult than both the difference-focused Picture Impression Task ( M = 2.30 , SD = 1.27 ; t ( 47 ) = 2.81 , p = .007 , d = .39 ) , and the Humor Evaluation Task ( M= 2.15 , SD= 1.23 ; t ( 47 ) = 3.61 , p= .001 , d= .50 ) .
The difference was not significant between the difference-focused Picture Impression Task and the Humor Evaluation Task ( t ( 47 ) = 1.29 , p = .20 ) .
Second , we examined how fun or enjoyable participants thought each task would be .
As expected , participants thought the Humor Evaluation Task would be more fun and enjoyable ( M = 4.69 , SD = 1.63 ) , com- pared to both the similarity-focus Picture Impression Task ( M = 3.85 , SD = 1.35 ; t ( 47 ) = 2.98 , p = .005 , d = .56 ) , and the difference-focus Picture Impression Task ( M = 3.60 , SD = 1.42 ; t ( 47 ) = 4.03 , p = .0002 , d = .71 ) .
Lastly , there was a marginal gap between the similarity- and difference-focus Picture Impression Tasks ( t ( 47 ) = 1.95 , p = .06 , d = .29 ) .
Returning to our main prediction , we expected that participants experiencing causal uncertainty would show higher rates of task re- sumption when the interrupted task was associated with more abstract ( vs. concrete ) thinking .
To measure task resumption , we gave partici- pants an opportunity to engage in a more enjoyable task that involved reading humorous stories .
The pilot study confirmed that the Humor Evaluation Task was indeed perceived as a more enjoyable alternative to participants .
Also , the similarity-focus Picture Impression Task was perceived as themost difficult task of all three , ruling out the possibility that people experiencing causal uncertaintywould choose this task sim- ply because it seems easier.2.2 .
Results 2.2.1 .
Manipulation check The causal uncertainty manipulation was successful .
Participants in the high ( vs. low ) causal uncertainty condition reported feeling more uncertain about the cause of their relationship conflict ( M = 3.27 , SD = 1.63 vs. M = 2.31 , SD = 1.27 ; t ( 83 ) = 3.03 , p b .01 , d = .66 ) .
Fig .
1 .
Task resumption rate in Experiments 1A ( left ) and 1B ( right ) .
Predicted probabilities ( based on a binary logistic regression model ) of task resumption as a function of causal uncertainty and interrupted task focus .
61J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–712.2.2 .
Task resumption Abinary logistic regressionwith uncertainty condition , task constru- al , and their interaction entered as predictors and the task resumption rate as the dependent variable revealed only the expected interaction effect ( B = 1.97 , SE = .97 , Wald =4.18 , p = .04 ) .
Among participants in the high causal uncertainty condition , a significantly greater propor- tion of participants chose to resume if they were interrupted from a more abstract ( vs. more concrete ) thinking task ( M = 78.95 % vs. M = 47.83 % ; B = −1.41 , SE = .70 , Wald = 4.04 , p = .04 , OR = 4.09 ) .
This difference was not significant in the low causal uncertainty condition ( M = 57.69 % vs. M = 70.59 % ; B = .57 , SE = .66 , Wald = .73 , p = .40 , OR=0.57 ) .
As shown in Fig .
1 ( left ) , the significant difference in task re- sumption among participants in the high causal uncertainty condition is driven by both an increased resumption rate of participants interrupted from the similarity focus task , and a decreased resumption rate of par- ticipants interrupted from the difference focus task .
In other words , as causal uncertainty increased , the likelihood of resuming increased for an opportunity that afforded more abstract thinking , but decreased for an opportunity that afforded more concrete thinking .
This is consistent with the notion that goal pursuit involves both approach and avoidance processes ( Fishbach , Zhang , & Trope , 2010 ; Förster et al. , 2007 ; Higgins , 2000 ) .2.3 .
Potential alternative explanations Experiences that facilitate goal attainment are typically evaluated positively , whereas experiences that hinder goal attainment are typ- ically evaluated negatively ( Förster et al. , 2007 ) .
For instance , people with an active goal to eat healthy assign more positive value toTable 1 Summary of data characteristics of Experiments 1A ( left ) and 1B ( right ) .
Experiment 1A ( N = 85 ) Experim Gender ; age 40 females ; Mage = 19.67 , SDage = 1.03 136 fem Institution Undergraduate students in University of Texas marketing classes Undergr Nevada Participation environment Computer lab with proctor guidance Survey l without Avg .
study duration 11 min 21 min Avg .
typing interruption duration 96 s 118 shealthy food and more negative value to unhealthy food ( Laran & Janiszewski , 2009 ) .
Indeed , we found that participants who experi- enced greater causal uncertainty weremore ( less ) attracted to an ac- tivity that affords more abstract ( concrete ) thinking .
However , one may wonder whether our effects can be accounted for by people 's tendency to desire activities that are easy or emotionally comforting .
In the next section , we discuss why these explanations are unlikely to account for our findings .
2.3.1 .
Anticipated task difficulty Is it possible that participants in this experiment expected that focusing on similarities ( as opposed to differences ) would be easier , leading those with high causal uncertainty to be more likely to re- sume after being interrupted ?
Prior research suggests that more ab- stract thinking is not inherently less effortful compared to more concrete thinking ( Fujita , Eyal , Chaiken , Trope , & Liberman , 2008 ; Liberman et al. , 2002 ; Smith & Trope , 2006 ) .
In fact , the pilot study indicated that identifying similarities between two different pictures was perceived to be more difficult than both of the other tasks .
Thus , it is highly unlikely that participants were simply choosing a task that seemed easier .
2.3.2 .
Anticipated mood One may also question whether participants who experienced causal uncertainty simply gravitated toward experiences that afforded more abstract thinking because they believed such experi- ences would elicit more positive feelings .
Research has found that more abstract thinking can foster positive evaluations ( Updegraff & Suh , 2007 ) .
However , whether more abstract thinking improvesent 1B ( N = 212 ) ales ; Mage = 20.64 , SDage = 4.22 aduate students in ( 1 ) University of Texas psychology classes , and ( 2 ) University of marketing classes ink distributed to students ; students completed survey at their own time & location proctor 62 J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71emotional states when people are focused on negative events is un- clear .
On one hand , research suggests that more abstract construals can provide a psychological buffer against negative evaluations and experiences ( Kross , Ayduk , & Mischel , 2005 ; Vess , Arndt , & Schlegel , 2011 ) .
On the other hand , more abstract construals can re- sult in an over-generalization of negative incidents and lead to stron- ger emotional reactions to negative outcomes ( Corcoran & Mussweiler , 2010 ; Watkins , Moberly , & Moulds , 2008 ) .
The task interruption and resumption paradigm used in this ex- periment rules out this alternative explanation because the alterna- tive task that participants could choose to do involved reading humorous stories .
The pilot study confirmed this , showing that par- ticipants thought the Humor Evaluation Task would be the most fun and enjoyable .
If participants ' goal was to simply be in a better mood state , rather than to think more abstractly , we would not have found our demonstrated effect ; that for participants experienc- ing high causal uncertainty , being interrupted from a more abstract ( vs. more concrete ) task resulted in a higher task resumption rate .
In sum , it seems unlikely that differences in anticipatedmood can ac- count for our observed effects .
Experiment 1A confirms our theory that more abstract thinking becomes an active goal when causal uncertainty increases .
Using a task interruption and resumption paradigm from prior motivation research , we found that participants with high causal uncertainty were more likely to resume after being interrupted from a more ab- stract ( vs. more concrete ) construal task , even when they could choose a more pleasurable task instead .
In contrast , task construal was not a significant determinant of task resumption in the low caus- al uncertainty condition .
3 .
Experiment 1B The purpose of Experiment 1B was to replicate the effect of Experi- ment 1A with a larger sample size .
We collected data from college stu- dents again ( N = 212 , 136 females ; Mage = 20.64 , SDage = 4.22 ) .
Due to theway the subject pool systemwas set up for these students , the ex- periment did not take place in a controlled computer lab setting as it did in Experiment 1A .
Rather , students received a URL ( a web link ) to the experiment , and had complete freedom when choosing when and where they could participate .
Table 1 summarizes the differences in sample characteristics between the original and replicated experiments .
The design and procedure of this experiment were identical to those of Experiment 1A .
3.1 .
Results 3.1.1 .
Manipulation check The causal uncertainty manipulation was successful .
Participants in the high ( vs. low ) causal uncertainty condition reported feeling more uncertain about the cause of their relationship conflict ( M = 3.34 , SD= 1.53 vs. M= 2.63 , SD= 1.38 ; t ( 210 ) = 3.56 , p b .0001 , d= .49 ) .
3.1.2 .
Task resumption A binary logistic regression with uncertainty condition , task con- strual , and their interaction entered as predictors and the task re- sumption rate as the dependent variable revealed only the expected interaction effect ( B = 1.31 , SE = .65 , Wald = 4.12 , p = .04 ) , replicating the finding from Experiment 1A .
The interaction shows that , as causal uncertainty increases , the task resumption rate increases for participants interrupted from a similarity-focus task , but decreases for those interrupted from a difference-focus task .
Fig .
1 shows the findings from Experiments 1A & 1B , side-by- side .
In this experiment , however , the simple effects analysis in the high causal uncertainty condition was not statistically significant ( B = .59 , SE = .45 , Wald = 1.70 , p = .19 ) .
As illustrated in Fig .
1 , this is because the overall task resumption rate in the difference focus condition was higher in Experiment 1B compared to Experi- ment 1A .
That is , participants in this experiment were , in general , more likely to resume the Picture Impression Task in the difference focus condition .
When people have limited cognitive capacity , they are more likely to focus on differences than on similarities ( Sherman , Conrey , & Groom , 2004 ; Sherman & Frost , 2000 ; Sherman , Lee , Bessenoff , & Frost , 1998 ) .
And we have supporting ev- idence that many of our participants in this experiment were indeed under high cognitive load .
As summarized in Table 1 , participants in Experiment 1A com- pleted the study in a controlled lab setting , whereas participants in this experiment were sent a web address via email and completed the study on their own .
As one might expect , this led to a significant number of students taking the survey in distracting conditions .
Be- fore participants exited Experiments 1A and 1B , we asked them : “ Any problems or comments ?
Is there anything we should know that happened during your session ?
Were you interrupted by some- one or something ? … Please be honest and detailed when answering this question… This will not affect your completion status or extra credit earnings in any way. ” In Experiment 1A , only 4 out of 85 students reported being dis- tracted ( 4.7 % of the sample ) : specifically , 1 student mentioned being distracted by another participant entering the computer lab , 1 student mentioned being distracted by the typing noise of other participants , and 2 students admitted they were listening to music through an earphone .
In Experiment 1B , however , out of 212 respon- dents , 18 ( 8.5 % ) admitted to listening to music , 8 ( 3.8 % ) said they were watching a video or television , and 34 ( 16 % ) reported talking to someone or being in a space where people were talking — e.g. , in a classroom during lecture .
Together , more than 28 % of the sample reported completing Experiment 1B in a distracting environment , which is almost six times greater than that of Experiment 1A .
Fur- thermore , participants in Experiment 1B spent twice as much time completing the identical study , and also spent a longer time during the task interruption phase , compared to those in Experiment 1A ( see Table 1 ) .
As noted earlier , a series of studies by Sherman and colleagues have established that when people have limited cognitive resources , they experience an increased inclination to pay attention to differ- ences and inconsistencies ( as opposed to similarities and consisten- cies ) .
This is a plausible explanation for why the baseline preference for the difference focus task is higher in Experiment 1B , compared to Experiment 1A .
Regardless of this difference between the two experiments , it is important to note that the predicted interaction between casual un- certainty and task construal remains constant in both : that is , as causal uncertainty increased , people were more likely to resume to an abstract thinking task ( i.e. , focusing on similarities ; facilitates goal for abstraction ) , and less likely to resume to a concrete thinking task ( i.e. , focusing on differences ; hinders goal for abstraction ) .
In the next experiment , we seek evidence for post-attainment decrement in motivation after goal satiation .
That is , we test whether participants who experience high causal uncertainty cease to show an increased preference for more abstract stimuli once they have had an opportunity to actually engage in more ab- stract thinking .
4 .
Experiment 2 The present experiment continues to examine the notion that causal uncertainty activates a goal to think more abstractly .
In this experiment , we again made participants feel more ( vs. less ) causally uncertain about a relationship problem , and then allowed them to actually think more abstractly ( goal fulfillment ) or more concretely ( goal failure ) in order to examine the effect of goal completion on 2 Given that participants were prevented from actually adopting a higher level of con- strual in Experiments 1A and 1B , we already have suggestive evidence that a cognitive flu- ency account is unlikely to explain our findings .
Fig .
2 .
Advertisement preference in Experiment 2 .
Mean liking of general advertisement relative to detailed advertisement ( 1 = Definitely like detailed advertisement , 6 = Definitely like general advertisement ) as a function of causal uncertainty and categorization activity in Experiment 2 .
Error bars denote one standard error around the mean .
63J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71participants ' preferences .
Researchers have distinguished between motivational and non-motivational phenomena using a variety of goal activation principles , one of them being that motivation dimin- ishes once a goal has been satisfied ( Bargh et al. , 2001 ; Ferguson & Bargh , 2004 ; Fitzsimons et al. , 2008 ; Förster et al. , 2007 ; Gollwitzer & Moskowitz , 1996 ; Laran & Janiszewski , 2009 ; Martin & Tesser , 2009 ) .
When a goal is active , individuals assign positive values to ob- jects and activities that increase the chance of goal attainment , or negative values to objects and activities that hinder goal attain- ment , or both ( Ferguson & Bargh , 2004 ; Förster et al. , 2007 ) .
For ex- ample , people report a greater preference for healthier ( tastier ) food options when their healthy-eating ( indulgence ) goal is active ( Laran & Janiszewski , 2009 ) .
Similarly , unconsciously primed goals to seek prestige and thrift increase people 's tendency to choose ex- pensive and economic options , respectively ( Chartrand , Huber , Shiv , & Tanner , 2008 ) .
Moreover , the evaluation of and engagement with an activity is higher when its strategic process fits with one 's goal-pursuit orientation ( Higgins , 2000 ; Higgins , Idson , Freitas , Spiegel , & Molden , 2003 ) .
These shifts in value serve a self- regulatory function , as people who assign more value to goal- related targets tend to be more successful in their goal-pursuits ( Ferguson & Porter , 2009 ) .
Thus , we predicted that individuals with a goal to think more abstractly would value opportunities that afford more abstract thinking more highly compared to those who do not have this goal .
Germane to our experiment , decreased motivation is often expressed by a shift in preference or construct accessibility after a goal is fulfilled ( for review , see Fishbach & Dhar , 2007 ; Wilcox , Vallen , Block , & Fitzsimons , 2009 ) .
For instance , Wilcox et al .
( 2009 ) found that participants revealed a weaker preference for healthy over indulgent food items ( e.g. , salads over potato chips ) if they believed they had fulfilled their health goal .
Also , Liberman and Förster ( 2000 ) found that suppressing a construct activates a need to use the construct , but when this need is satisfied , the con- struct is no longer highly accessible .
Thus , we hypothesized that the goal to think more abstractly after experiencing high ( vs. low ) causal uncertainty should be satisfied once people actually engage in more abstract thinking , leading them to no longer exhibit a more positive attitude toward opportunities that afford more abstract thinking .
A key benefit of this paradigm is that it allows us to confirm that our effects are indeed driven by motivation , rather than cognitivecongruency between participants ' actual construal level and evaluat- ed stimuli ( i.e. , a cognitive fluency account ) .
Research has shown that people are more favorable toward messages , pictures , and prod- ucts when the level at which these things are represented are con- gruent with people 's cognitive orientations , presumably because of increased ease of processing ( Kim , Rao , & Lee , 2009 ; White , MacDonnell , & Dahl , 2011 ) .
Since Helzer and Edwards ( 2012 ) have already found that priming causal uncertainty actually led to more abstract thinking , one might argue that any preference we observe in the current experiment for abstract stimuli among uncertain indi- viduals is not a consequence of goal activation , but of the cognitive congruency between participants ' actual construal level and the evaluated target .
The design of this experiment allows us to rule out this alterna- tive explanation .
If it is cognitive congruency that is driving people 's preferences in this experiment , then engaging in an abstract thinking task should increase people 's liking of more abstract stimuli .
A moti- vational account , however , predicts the opposite .
That is , a more ab- stract thinking task would satiate the abstract thinking goal , resulting in reduced attraction toward more abstract stimuli among individuals with high causal uncertainty .
Because these two poten- tial mechanisms ( cognitive fluency vs. goal fulfillment ) would lead to different predictions , we can empirically identify the underlying process through this experiment.2 We argued that the abstract thinking goal activated by causal uncertainty is a generalized effect based on past experience ( Namkoong & Henderson , 2014 ) , and an abstract thinking style is a general mode of processing information which often affects unre- lated contexts ( Burgoon et al. , 2013 ) .
Thus , the effect of an abstract thinking goal should have an impact even in unrelated contexts .
Consistent with this prediction , Namkoong and Henderson ( 2014 ) found that thinking at an abstract level in one context suc- cessfully reduced causal uncertainty in another , unrelated context .
So , in this experiment , we measured participant 's preference for advertising messages unrelated to the causal uncertainty manipulation .
Persuasive messages often vary in their levels of abstractness ( Corcoran , Epstude , Damisch , & Mussweiler , 2011 ; Hansen & Wänke , 2010 ; Haws & Poynor , 2008 ; Kim et al. , 2009 ) .
For instance , a marketer may decide to highlight the general desirability of a product ( e.g. , safety ) or specific features of the product ( e.g. , six airbags ) .
We measured whether participants ' preference toward a more abstract advertisement in the high causal uncertainty condi- tion shifted downward as a result of fulfilling an abstract thinking goal.4.1 .
Method One hundred and twenty-six University of Texas students ( 52 fe- males ) participated for course credit .
This experiment relied on a 2 ( causal uncertainty : high vs. low ) × 2 ( task construal : abstract vs. con- crete ) between-participants design.4.1.1 .
Manipulation of uncertainty As in Experiments 1A and 1B , we first asked participants to recall a specific relationship conflict they had with a close other .
On the next screen , participants wrote about causal aspects of the conflict that they either had difficulty understanding ( high causal uncertainty ) or 64 J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71understood very well ( low causal uncertainty ) .
Then they answered the same manipulation check questions used in the previous experiments .
4.1.2 .
Categorization task To manipulate goal fulfillment or failure , we then directed partici- pants to an allegedly separate survey where they either completed a more abstract or more concrete thinking task .
Specifically , we used a breadth of categorization task modeled after Ülkümen , Chakravarti , and Morwitz 's ( 2010 ) task .
Categorizing objects into broad and narrow categories reflect more abstract and concrete thinking , respectively ( Burgoon et al. , 2013 ) .
In this task , participants categorized 13 daily activities ( e.g. , doing homework , cleaning the house ) either as broadly or as narrowly as possible .
To describe what we meant by broad ( narrow ) categorization to participants , we used the fol- lowing instructions : “ Categorize all activities AS BROADLY ( NAR- ROWLY ) AS POSSIBLE .
Use a SMALL ( LARGE ) NUMBER OF CATEGORIES .
Focusing on the similarities ( differences ) between these activities is known to help. ” 4.1.3 .
Preference Finally , in an ostensibly separate survey , we asked participants to in- dicate their relative preference between two advertisements about a BMW automobile , one being more abstract , and the other being more concrete .
We used the abstract and concrete versions of advertisements from Haws and Poynor ( 2008 ) .
The abstract advertisement described the automobile using general statements ( e.g. , “ The enjoyment provid- ed to the driver of such an extraordinarymode of transport is practically immeasurable ” ) .
The concrete advertisement described the same auto- mobile using detail-oriented information ( e.g. , “ The 750Li offers more legroom for rear-seat occupants , standard 20-way comfort front seats , and chrome roof moldings ” ) .
We assessed participants ' relative prefer- ence by asking them “ Which admessage do you like better ? ” ( 1= Def- initely Option A , 6 = Definitely Option B ) .
Whether the abstract or concrete advertisement was presented as Option A or B was counterbalanced , although this did not alter the pattern of our results .
4.2 .
Results and discussion 4.2.1 .
Manipulation checks As predicted , the high ( vs. low ) causal uncertainty group felt more uncertain about their relationship conflict ( M = 3.14 , SD = 1.61 vs. M=2.43 , SD=1.12 ; t ( 124 ) =2.87 , p b .01 , d=.51 ) .
The categorization manipulationwas also successful ; participants in the broad ( vs. narrow ) categorization group generated fewer categories ( M= 3.83 , SD= 2.26 vs.M = 5.55 , SD= 2.74 , t ( 124 ) = 3.85 , p b .001 , d = .69 ) .
4.2.2 .
Preference A 2 ( uncertainty : high vs. low ) × 2 ( construal level : narrow categori- zation vs. broad categorization ) between-participants ANOVA revealed only a significant interaction between causal uncertainty and actual con- strual level , F ( 1,122 ) = 4.26 , p = .04 , partial η2 = .03 ( Fig .
2 ) .
Further analyses of simple effects showed that the narrow categorization condi- tions , in which the goal to thinkmore abstractly was presumably not ful- filled , conceptually replicated thefinding of previous experiments .
That is , we found that participants who felt uncertain ( vs. certain ) about the cause of a problem expressed a greater relative preference for an adver- tisement with general ( vs. detailed ) descriptions ( M = 4.59 , SD = 1.55 vs.M=3.60 , SD=1.68 , t ( 60 ) = 2.38 , p= .02 , d= .61 ) .
A very different pattern emerged in the broad categorization conditions .
As expected , high causal uncertainty was not associated with a greater preference for the general advertisement , suggesting that participants ' abstract thinking goal in the high causal uncertainty condition was satisfied through the broad categorization activity ( Muncertain = 3.59 , SDuncertain = 1.71 vs. Mcertain = 3.85 , SDcertain = 1.77 , t ( 62 ) = .59 , p= .56 , d= .15 ) .
Also con- sistent with our theory , participants in the high causal uncertaintycondition felt less attracted to the general ad after they completed the broad ( vs. narrow ) categorization task ( M = 3.59 , SD = 1.71 vs. M = 4.59 , SD= 1.55 , t ( 62 ) = 2.40 , p= .02 , d= .61 ) .
These results support and extend the findings from previous exper- iments , which demonstrated that causal uncertainty created greater at- traction toward opportunities that afforded abstraction , presumably because the goal to think more abstractly was active .
In addition , this experiment shows that participants in the high causal uncertainty con- dition no longer experienced increased attraction toward an experience that afforded more abstract thinking once they completed an activity that actually fostered more abstract ( vs. concrete ) thinking .
Post- attainment decrement in motivation is one of the key principles of goal pursuit ( Förster et al. , 2007 ) .
Hence , the fact that participants were less likely to prefer the experience that afforded more abstract thinking once they had engaged in abstraction confirms that attraction toward abstraction is indeed a product of goal pursuit rather than cog- nitive congruency .
This finding also extends Helzer and Edwards ' ( 2012 ) findings , as they did not examinewhat happens to people 's pref- erences after engaging in abstraction .
For participants in the low causal uncertainty condition , there should not have been an active goal to think more abstractly .
Conse- quently , no goal should have been satisfied by the categorization task and thus no changes in participants ' preferences should have been ob- served .
The results were consistent with this expectation , as the level of abstraction of the categorization task had no effect on participants ' advertisement preference in the low causal uncertainty conditions , Mabstract = 3.85 , SDabstract = 1.77 vs. Mconcrete = 3.60 , SDconcrete = 1.68 , t ( 60 ) = .57 , p = .57 , d = .15 .
In the absence of a thinking goal ( i.e. , in low causal uncertainty condi- tions ) , the cognitive congruency between the categorization task and the advertisement could have enhanced people 's preference for the congru- ent advertisementmessage , but it did not .
Sowhy didwe did not observe the effect of cognitive congruency in the low causal uncertainty condition after participants engaged in a broad or narrow categorization task ?
One possible explanation is that our experimental procedure focused on test- ing goal activation , which could have disrupted participants ' fluency ex- perience originating from cognitive congruency .
Indeed , research has shown that the cognitive congruency effect has many boundary conditions .
For example , the cognitive congruency ef- fect on persuasion was observed among novices but not among partic- ipants who had more knowledge about the topic being evaluated ( Kim et al. , 2009 ) .
Moreover , relying on the “ feels right ” experience , or the mood-as-information heuristic , is less likely when people have the ability and motivation to engage in more deliberate processing ( Kim et al. , 2009 ; Schwarz & Clore , 1983 ; Srull , 1987 ) .
Thus , it is possible that the procedure of recalling a negative event with significant person- al relevance , independent of causal uncertainty and the activation of a goal to think more abstractly , lowered the likelihood that participants would rely on heuristics based on cognitive congruency ( Schwarz , 2001 ) .
This may explain why participants who focused on aspects of their negative experiences that they were certain about , were unaffect- ed by the cognitive congruency between their actual construal level and the subsequently presented advertisement .
Experiment 2 provides further evidence in support of our theory that causal uncertainty motivates people to think more abstractly .
That is , the findings from this experiment were consistent with our prediction that an active goal to think at a more abstract level would lead people to prefer more abstract stimuli , but that once the goal is fulfilled , they would no longer be attracted to more abstract thinking.5 .
General discussion Tiger got to hunt , Bird got to fly ; Man got to sit and wonder , “ Why , why , why ? ” Tiger got to sleep , Bird got to land ; Man got to tell himself he understand.― From the novel Cat 's Cradle , Kurt Vonnegut 65J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71Similar to how people can be motivated to do and be certain things , they can also be motivated to think in certain ways .
The present re- search examines a specific type of thinking goal , namely , a goal to think more abstractly , and demonstrates that this goal is triggered when people experience causal uncertainty .
Understanding the cause of events , especially negative ones , is a fundamental human need , and the lack of such understanding can be damaging to one 's psychological well-being ( Boucher & Jacobson , 2012 ; Edwards et al. , 1998 ; Wong & Weiner , 1981 ) .
In three experiments , we relied on principles of goal activation to testwhether people adopt a goal to think in amore abstractway .
Specif- ically , we found that participants who experienced heightened causal uncertainty were more likely to resume an experience that afforded more abstract ( vs. concrete ) thinking ( Experiments 1A & 1B ) .Moreover , we demonstrated that individuals experiencing high causal uncertainty were more likely to exhibit reduced attraction to an experience that afforded more abstract thinking once they had attained their goal to think more abstractly ( Experiment 2 ) .
These findings are consistent with the principles of goal activation that highlight persistence prior to goal attainment and decrement in motivation after goal attainment ( Bargh et al. , 2001 ; Förster et al. , 2007 ) .
The research presented in this article provides a unique extension of prior work on causal uncertainty and abstract construals .
Specifically , we add to Namkoong and Henderson 's research ( 2014 ) by demonstrat- ing that the uncertainty-reducing benefit ofmore abstract thinking con- tributes to an overgeneralized association between causal uncertainty and an abstract thinking style ; as a result , experiencing causal uncer- taintymotivates people to thinkmore abstractly .
Our findings also com- plement Helzer and Edwards ' research ( 2012 ) by elucidating the full process by which causal uncertainty may ultimately lead to more ab- stract construals .
That is , whereas Helzer and Edwards demonstrated what happens when people have an unimpeded opportunity to think more abstractly as a function of causal uncertainty , our findings demon- strate what happens when such opportunities are impeded ( Experi- ments 1A & 1B ) , and what happens after such opportunities are taken advantage of ( Experiment 2 ) .
In other words , integrating our findings with those of Helzer and Edwards ( 2012 ) and Namkoong and Henderson ( 2014 ) provides a complete picture of themotivational pro- cess bywhich people pursue an abstract thinking goal to reduce feelings of causal uncertainty .
Hence , a key contribution of the current work is that it places causal uncertaintywithin the broader context ofmotivated social cognition research , as we directly illustrate the motivational pro- cess thought to underlie the often observed causal uncertainty effects on social cognitive processes .
6 .
Broader theoretical implications 6.1 .
Motivated abstraction Prior research has demonstrated that people are often motivated to evaluate causal relationships at a more abstract level .
For example , peo- ple often think of personal successes as more global and stable , driven by dispositional , internal forces rather than contextual , external factors ( Mezulis et al. , 2004 ) .
Related to this is the goal of ingroup protection , which presumably motivates people to think more abstractly about de- sirable ingroup behaviors and undesirable outgroup behaviors ( Maass et al. , 1996 ) .
Furthermore , unexpected behaviors of others are well re- membered , possibly because individuals extend cognitive effort to un- derstand unexpected behaviors in connection with other behaviors which may require a more big-picture perspective ( Hastie , 1980 ; Srull , 1981 ) .
As these lines of research demonstrate , people are oftenmotivat- ed to think at a higher or lower level due to a variety of factors .
Across our studies , we demonstrate that the experience of causal uncertainty is another factor that can motivate a more abstract construal .
We posit- ed such an effect based onprior researchdemonstrating that abstraction reduces feelings of causal uncertainty ( Namkoong & Henderson , 2014 ) .That is , the benefit of more abstract thinking is presumably learned and generalized over time , leading people to seek abstract thinking under causal uncertainty .
Thus , our findings both complement and extend prior work on motivated abstraction .
6.2 .
Motivated cognition Numerous studies have examined the unique characteristics and consequences associated with active and fulfilled goals ( Ferguson & Bargh , 2004 ; Förster et al. , 2007 ; Gollwitzer & Brandstätter , 1997 ; Laran & Janiszewski , 2009 ; Wilcox et al. , 2009 ) .
While these studies fo- cused on behavioral goals , or goals related to performance standards , we extend the literature by examining themotivational process behind a goal to adopt a thinking style .
Importantly , we demonstrate that think- ing goals share a similar feature with behavioral or performance goals .
Our findings show that the activation and fulfillment of a thinking goal shape people 's preferences toward means that can help them achieve their goal .
People also persist through obstacles to satisfy a thinking goal .
Therefore , the present research complements prior re- search on various types of motivated cognition ( Festinger , 1957 ; Fitzsimons et al. , 2008 ; Gollwitzer & Bayer , 1999 ; Kruglanski & Webster , 1996 ; Kunda , 1990 ; Lerner , 1980 ; Murray & Holmes , 1997 ) by adding insight into what consequences they might have as active and fulfilled goals .
6.3 .
Practical implications The fact that we demonstrate the effects of causal uncertainty about real problems on people 's preferences in unrelated domains implies a number of practical applications of our findings .
Many services and products are offered to people who experience uncertainty ( Guerra , 2013 ; Villarica & Bailey , 2009 ) .
In times of crises when causal uncertain- ty is presumably high , telephone “ hotlines ” are set up , and leaders often try to communicate their support to those who suffer from uncertainty ( Burke , 2001 ; Kerley , 2011 ; Nagourney , 2011 ; Wheaton , 2011 ) .
In busi- ness , Toyota developed a problem-solving tool specifically geared to- ward reducing causal uncertainty related to their business problems ( Marksberry , 2012 ) .
Thepresent researchhighlights the role of an active abstract-thinking goal , in determining people 's behaviors and their atti- tudes toward framed messages .
Goals can guide behavior and cognition so that people act and think in ways that are expected to increase their chances of goal fulfillment— these behaviors include making choices that are relevant to one 's goal , but also persistence and continued effort until the goal is fulfilled , even when there are temptations and other obstacles ( Bargh , 1994 ) .
For example , when a consumer is uncertain why her product has failed , and thus is motivated to think more abstractly , she might increase her effort in searching for abstract information or engaging in tasks that in- volve more abstract cognitive processing ( e.g. , talking to other con- sumers about the similarities between this and other product failures ) .
Our findings in Experiments 1A and 1B also suggest that this consumer will show a high level of persistence while doing so , even at emotional costs and even when it requires more cognitive effort .
Prior work highlights that self-regulatory concerns can determine the effectiveness of framed messages ( Cesario , Corker , & Jelinek , 2013 ) .
Consistent with this idea , our findings in Experiment 2 suggest that when targeting people who are uncertain about why negative events happen , presenting information at a higher , more abstract level can be effective at capturing their attention and interest .
For example , a couple trying to understand why they constantly argue should be more attracted to a counselor whose practice aims to facilitate more global communication between them .
Ourfindings also imply thatmar- keters should benefit from using broader descriptions about their prod- ucts and services when targeting consumers who are known to be casually uncertain about a problem ; similarly , abstract language in ad- vertisements should bemore beneficial in industries that are inherently Table 2 Comparison of key findings ( interactions , and simple effects in high causal uncertainty conditions ) examined with ( left ) and without ( right ) participants whose reported first language is not English .
All participants Participants whose first language is English Exp .
1A Sample size 85 64 Interaction B = 1.97 , SE = .97 , p = .04 B = 3.26 , SE = 1.40 , p = .02 Task resumption in high causal uncertainty Msimilarity = 78.95 % Mdifference = 47.83 % B = 1.41 , SE = .70 , p = .04 , OR = 4.09 Msimilarity = 92.31 % Mdifference = 47.37 % B = 2.59 , SE = 1.14 p = .02 , OR = 13.33 Exp .
1B Sample size 212 171 Interaction B = 1.31 , SE = .65 , p = .04 B = 2.01 , SE = .76 , p = .008 Task resumption in high causal uncertainty Msimilarity = 78.26 % Mdifference = 66.67 % B = .59 , SE = .45 p = .19 , OR = 1.80 Msimilarity = 84.62 % Mdifference = 64.00 % B = 1.13 , SE = .53 p = .03 , OR = 3.09 Exp .
2 Sample size 126 102 Interaction F ( 1,122 ) = 4.26 , p = .04 partial η2 = .03 F ( 1,98 ) = 4.11 , p = .04 partial η2 = .04 Preference for general ad in high causal uncertainty Mbroad = 3.59 Mnarrow = 4.59 t ( 62 ) = 2.40 , p = .02 d = .61 Mbroad = 3.53 Mnarrow = 4.84 t ( 49 ) = 2.71 , p = .009 d = .76 66 J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71associated with higher causal uncertainty ( e.g. , medical services or death care businesses ) .
The present research can also provide insight for effective communi- cation strategies for political leaders .
Constituencies should be particu- larly receptive to public officials who frame their messages in more abstract terms during times when people are prone to feel causally un- certain ( e.g. , during the aftermath of a natural disaster ) .
Indeed , leaders ' approval during times of public uncertainty often hinges on their ability to communicate a broad vision or higher level meaning and avoid bombarding people with trivial details ( Loth , 2009 ) .
Moreover , be- cause causal uncertainty activates a motivational process toward achieving an abstract thinking style , such implications are pertinent only until this goal is satisfied .
This makes the timing of targeted communication strategies a highly relevant factor in determining their effectiveness.6.4 .
Future directions A promising direction for future researchwould be to examinemod- erating factors that intensify or dampen the effects found in the present research .
For example , one should expect that the degree towhichmore abstract construals have reduced one 's causal uncertainty in the past should moderate the degree to which causal uncertainty motivates one to think more abstractly in the future .
In other words , if thinking more abstractly was not beneficial in the past , it is unlikely that one de- velops a positive association between the experience of causal uncer- tainty and more abstract thinking .
To illustrate , consider feelings of causal uncertainty associated with positive events ( e.g. , pleasant sur- prises ) .
People may be eager to know what caused positive events and even successfully reduce feelings of causal uncertainty via an ab- straction process ; however , uncovering the reason behind these events can dampen the excitement ( Wilson , Centerbar , Kermer , & Gilbert , 2005 ) .
In other words , for positive events , causal uncertain- ty is likely associated not only with reduced causal uncertainty but also with reduced pleasant emotions .
Thus , the positive association between abstract thinking and causal uncertainty could be weaker , and the goal to think abstractly may not be activated as strongly for positive events .
As we only examined the effects of causal uncer- tainty surrounding negative events in this research , we look forward to future work that examines similar processes in the context of positive events.Another potential moderator , related to the discussion above , is culture .
As we further explored the data of this paper 's experiments , we found an additional , notable pattern .
Interestingly , when we only analyzed the responses of participants whose reported first language is English , we found that our proposed effect was significantly stronger in all studies ( Experiments 1A , 1B , and 2 ) .
Table 2 summarizes the key findings .
We do not believe this is due to language barrier ( e.g. , inability to comprehend study questions or instructions ) for a cou- ple of reasons .
First , participants in all of our experiments were univer- sity students at a well-established institution .
Second , the overall fluency level was very high .
For example in Experiment 2 , we asked “ How fluent is your English ? ” ( 1 = not at all , 7 = very much ) , and only 5 % of the sample selected a point below 7 , despite the fact that 19 % of the participants said their first language was not English .
In addition , when English fluency was included in the model as a control variable , it was not significant and had no impact on other variables .
Thus , we believe that culture is a potential moderator , independent of language fluency .
In an attempt to better understand ourfindings , we examined the data fromNamkoong andHenderson ( 2014 ) , because the proposed psychological mechanism of the present research was based on this paper .
The present research proposes that an abstract-thinking goal should be activated when facing causal uncertainty because , as shown in Namkoong and Henderson ( 2014 ) , people feel less uncertain about why things happen after they get a chance to think abstractly .
As individuals repeatedly experience the benefit of abstract thinking for reducing causal uncertainty , later , a goal to think abstractly is pre- sumably automatically activatedwhen people experience causal uncer- tainty .
Indeed , when we examined the data from Namkoong and Henderson ( 2014 ) , all of which were collected via Amazon Mechanical Turk , the percentages of non-native English speakers were only 4 % or less across all of the experiments , significantly lower than those of the present research .
This suggests that the proposedmechanism and effect of this line of research may not apply the same way to people with dif- ferent cultural backgrounds .
Prior research suggests that culture can determine how people pro- cess similarities and differences .
For example , individuals in Eastern cul- tures tend to think more holistically than their Western counterparts , meaning , they are more prone to see connections between disparate events ( Han & Schmitt , 1997 ; Monga & John , 2007 ; Nisbett , Peng , Choi , & Norenzayan , 2001 ) .
For individuals with an Eastern cultural background , focusing on similarities the same way those fromWestern 67J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71cultures do may not be as beneficial , because the holistic thinking style would lead them to see relationships between highly distinctive events even when lacking logical connections .
Despite the consistent pattern we observe in our data , closely examining this potential culturalmoder- ator is beyond the scope of the present research becausewe do not have a large enough number of non-native English speakers in our samples .
We also lack information about the precise cultural background of the non-native English speakers in our samples .
Thus , we believe this is an important area for future research .
Researchers should also examine whether an abstract thinking goal is activated and/or operated automatically ( Bargh , 1994 ; Chartrand & Bargh , 1996 ; Moskowitz , 2002 ; Oettingen , Grant , Smith , Skinner , & Gollwitzer , 2006 ) .
According to Bargh ( 1994 ) , the activation and pursuit of a goal can be automatic in different ways .
For example , people may lack awareness of the activation and pursuit of a goal .
People may also lack the ability to decide when to activate or deactivate a goal , even if they have awareness .
Finally , if a goal is automatic , it would take very little effort to pursue the goal .
The present research hints at some of these possibilities for an abstract thinking goal .
For instance , the fact that we found preference shifts in domains unrelated to the source of causal uncertainty ( both Experiments 1 and 2 ) suggests that partici- pants lack awareness in one or more stages of their goal pursuit .
For example , it is likely people are unaware that experiencing causal uncer- tainty causes any preference for stimuli that can afford more abstract thinking .
Yet , people may become aware that they are seeking abstract things or opportunities to think in more abstract ways .
Also , we found that distracting people with a typing task prevented them from sponta- neously engaging in abstract thoughts ( Experiment 1 ) , which could mean that pursuing an abstract thinking goal is not highly efficient .
These are questions that areworth exploring not only from a theoretical point of view but also from a practical point of view , because they can shed light on the strength and effectiveness of subtle abstract persua- sive appeals .
Future research should also examinewhether the effect of causal un- certainty on abstract thinking applies only to causal uncertainty ormore broadly to other types of uncertainty .
The present research focuses on understanding causality in past events , but people experience uncer- tainty in various domains , including uncertainties about future out- comes ( Van Dijk & Zeelenberg , 2007 ) , the environment ( Mittal & Griskevicius , 2014 ) , affective states ( Tiedens & Linton , 2001 ) , and even the self ( Hogg , 2000 ; Rios , Markman , Schroeder , & Dyczewski , 2014 ; Van den Bos & Lind , 2002 ) .
We based our predictions on previous find- ings by Namkoong and Henderson ( 2014 ) , which demonstrated thatAppendix A. Appendixabstract thinking enables people to form simpler mental representa- tions of causal relationships , thus reducing feelings of causal uncertain- ty .
It is possible that abstraction also simplifies mental representations of future events , the environment , affective experiences , and self- concepts .
Consequently , experiencing uncertainty in these domains could activate an abstract thinking goal , although this remains to be an open question and potential for future research .
On the other hand , it is also possible that certain types of uncertainty might even trigger concrete-thinking goals .
For example , onemight argue that uncertainty about how ( as opposed to why ) things happen is better resolved by fo- cusing on the details ( Freitas , Gollwitzer , & Trope , 2004 ; Trope & Liberman , 2003 ; Vallacher & Wegner , 1989 ) .
More broadly , it may be of interest to researchers to test themotiva- tional principles underlying other types ofmotivated cognitions beyond abstraction .
For example , how would people react when their goal to form accurate impressions of others ( Neuberg , 1989 ) is interrupted ?
Also , whatwould happen after people fulfill their need for cognitive clo- sure ( Kruglanski & Webster , 1996 ) ?
Similarly , how would people re- spond if their attempt at restoring their belief in a just-world ( Lerner , 1980 ) was interrupted or if other means to reach the same goal were provided ?
As illustrated by these empirical questions , using experimen- tal paradigms for testingmotivational principles can provide a more in- depth understanding about the constructs of interest.7 .
Coda The present research demonstrated a novel reaction to causal uncertainty , namely , the pursuit of a goal to think more abstractly .
This is a useful goal to have , as indicated by recent findings showing that abstraction makes people feel more certain about why negative events happen .
The research presented in this article demonstrates how directly examining the pursuit and completion of a thinking goal can shed unique insights into what it means for a cognition to be motivated .
We look forward to continued research that examines the interplay between motivation and cognitive processing more broadly.Acknowledgments We thank Bertram Gawronski for his helpful feedback on themanu- script , and offer special thanks to Bob Josephs .
Appendix B .
Appendix 68 J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71 69J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71References Aarts , H. , Gollwitzer , P. M. , & Hassin , R. R. ( 2004 ) .
Goal contagion : Perceiving is for pursu- ing .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 87 ( 1 ) , 23–37 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .
1037/0022-3514.87.1.23 .
Andrade , H. G. ( 2005 ) .
Teaching with rubrics : The good , the bad , and the ugly .
College Teaching , 53 ( 1 ) , 27–30 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.3200/CTCH.53.1.27-31 .
Balcetis , E. , & Dunning , D. ( 2006 ) .
See what you want to see : Motivational influences on visual perception .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 91 ( 4 ) , 612–625 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.91.4.612 .
Balcetis , E. , & Dunning , D. ( 2007 ) .
Cognitive dissonance and the perception of natural en- vironments .
Psychological Science , 18 ( 10 ) , 917–921 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- 9280.2007.02000.x .
Bargh , J .
A .
( 1994 ) .
The four horsemen of automaticity : Intention , awareness , efficiency , and control in social cognition .
In R. S .
WyerJr. , & T. K. Srull ( Eds .
) , Handbook of social cognition ( 2nd ed . ) 1 .
( pp .
1–40 ) .
Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates .
Bargh , J .
A. , Gollwitzer , P. M. , Lee-Chai , A. , Barndollar , K. , & Trötschel , R. ( 2001 ) .
The auto- mated will : Nonconscious activation and pursuit of behavioral goals .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 81 ( 6 ) , 1014–1027 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 0022-3514.81.6.1014 .
Boucher , E. M. , & Jacobson , J .
A .
( 2012 ) .
Causal uncertainty during initial interactions .
European Journal of Social Psychology , 42 ( 5 ) , 652–663 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1002/ ejsp.1876 .
Bradley , M. M. , Sabatinelli , D. , Lang , P. J. , Fitzsimmons , J. R. , King , W. , & Desai , P. ( 2003 ) .
Activation of the visual cortex in motivated attention .
Behavioral Neuroscience , 117 ( 2 ) , 369–380 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0735-7044.117.2.369 .
Burgoon , E. M. , Henderson , M. D. , & Markman , A .
B .
( 2013 ) .
There are many ways to see the forest for the trees : A tour guide for abstraction .
Perspectives on Psychological Science , 8 ( 5 ) , 501–520 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/1745691613497964 .
Burke , C. ( 2001 ) .
World Trade Center tragedy : How you can help .
Nursing News Retrieved from Nursezone website : http : //www.nursezone.com/nursing-news-events/more- news/Update-World-Trade-Center-Tragedy-How-You-Can-Help_29042.aspx .
Campbell , W. K. , & Sedikides , C. ( 1999 ) .
Self-threat magnifies the self-serving bias : A meta-analytic integration .
Review of General Psychology , 3 ( 1 ) , 23–43 .
http : //dx.doi .
org/10.1037/1089-2680.3.1.23 .
Cesario , J. , Corker , K. S. , & Jelinek , S. ( 2013 ) .
A self-regulatory framework for message framing .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 49 ( 2 ) , 238–249 .
http : //dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jesp.2012.10.014 .
Chartrand , T. L. , & Bargh , J .
A .
( 1996 ) .
Automatic activation of impression formation and memorization goals : Nonconscious goal priming reproduces effects of explicit task instructions .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 71 ( 3 ) , 464–478 .
http : //dx .
doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.71.3.464 .
Chartrand , T. L. , Huber , J. , Shiv , B. , & Tanner , R. J .
( 2008 ) .
Nonconscious goals and consum- er choice .
Journal of Consumer Research , 35 ( 2 ) , 189–201 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1086/ 588685 .
Chernev , A .
( 2001 ) .
The impact of common features on consumer preferences : A case of confirmatory reasoning .
Journal of Consumer Research , 27 ( 4 ) , 475–488 .
http : //dx.doi .
org/10.1086/319622 .
Corcoran , K. , & Mussweiler , T. ( 2010 ) .
The cognitive miser 's perspective : Social compari- son as a heuristic in self-judgements .
European Review of Social Psychology , 21 ( 1 ) , 78–113 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1080/10463283.2010.508674 .
Corcoran , K. , Epstude , K. , Damisch , L. , & Mussweiler , T. ( 2011 ) .
Fast similarities : Efficiency advantages of similarity-focused comparisons .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 37 ( 5 ) , 1280–1286 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/ a0023922 .
Crocker , J. , & Luhtanen , R. ( 1990 ) .
Collective self-esteem and ingroup bias .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 58 ( 1 ) , 60–67 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022- 3514.58.1.60 .
De Dreu , C. K. W. , Koole , S. L. , & Oldersma , F. L. ( 1999 ) .
On the seizing and freezing of ne- gotiator inferences : Need for cognitive closure moderates the use of heuristics in ne- gotiation .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 25 ( 3 ) , 348–362 .
http : //dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/0146167299025003007 .
De Dreu , C .
K.W. , Nijstad , B .
A. , & van Knippenberg , D. ( 2008 ) .
Motivated information pro- cessing in group judgment and decision making .
Personality and Social Psychology Review , 12 ( 1 ) , 22–49 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/1088868307304092 .
De Grada , E. , Kruglanski , A. W. , Mannetti , L. , & Pierro , A .
( 1999 ) .
Motivated cognition and group interaction : Need for closure affects the contents and processes of collective negotiations .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 35 ( 4 ) , 346–365 .
http : //dx .
doi.org/10.1006/jesp.1999.1376 .
Dijksterhuis , A. , van Knippenberg , A. , Kruglanski , A. W. , & Schaper , C. ( 1996 ) .
Motivated social cognition : Need for closure effects on memory and judgment .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 32 ( 3 ) , 254–270 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1006/jesp.1996 .
0012 .
Ditto , P. H. , Scepansky , J .
A. , Munro , G. D. , Apanovitch , A. M. , & Lockhart , L. K. ( 1998 ) .
Motivated sensitivity to preference-inconsistent information .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 75 ( 1 ) , 53–69 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 0022-3514.75.1.53 .
Edwards , J .
A. , Weary , G. , & Reich , D. A .
( 1998 ) .
Causal uncertainty : Factor structure and relation to the Big Five personality factors .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 24 ( 5 ) , 451–462 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167298245001 .
Elliot , A. J. , & Devine , P. G. ( 1994 ) .
On the motivational nature of cognitive dissonance : Dissonance as psychological discomfort .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 67 ( 3 ) , 382–394 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.67.3.382 .
Elliot , A. J. , & Thrash , T. M. ( 2002 ) .
Approach–avoidance motivation in personality : Ap- proach and avoidance temperaments and goals .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 82 ( 5 ) , 804–818 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.82.5.804.Fazio , R. H. , Zanna , M. P. , & Cooper , J .
( 1977 ) .
Dissonance and self-perception : An in- tegrative view of each theory 's proper domain of application .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 13 ( 5 ) , 464–479 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 0022-1031 ( 77 ) 90031-2 .
Ferguson , M. J. , & Bargh , J .
A .
( 2004 ) .
Liking is for doing : The effects of goal pursuit on au- tomatic evaluation .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 87 ( 5 ) , 557–572 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.87.5.557 .
Ferguson , M. J. , & Porter , S. C. ( 2009 ) .
Goals and ( implicit ) attitudes : A social–cognitive perspective .
In G. B. Moskowitz , & H. Grant ( Eds .
) , The psychology of goals ( pp .
454–460 ) .
New York , NY : Guilford Press .
Festinger , L. ( 1957 ) .
A theory of cognitive dissonance .
Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press .
Fishbach , A. , & Dhar , R. ( 2007 ) .
Dynamics of goal-based choice .
In C. P. Haugtvedt , P. M. Herr , & F. R. Kardes ( Eds .
) , Handbook of consumer psychology ( pp .
611–637 ) .
New York , NY : Psychology Press .
Fishbach , A. , Friedman , R. S. , & Kruglanski , A. W. ( 2003 ) .
Leading us not into temptation : Momentary allurements elicit overriding goal activation .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 84 ( 2 ) , 296–309 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.84.2.296 .
Fishbach , A. , Zhang , Y. , & Trope , Y .
( 2010 ) .
Counteractive evaluation : Asymmetric shifts in the implicit value of conflicting motivations .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 46 ( 1 ) , 29–38 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2009.09.008 .
Fitzsimons , G. M. , Chartrand , T. L. , & Fitzsimons , G. J .
( 2008 ) .
Automatic effects of brand exposure on motivated behavior : How Apple makes you “ think different ” .
Journal of Consumer Research , 35 ( 1 ) , 21–35 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1086/527269 .
Förster , J. , Liberman , N. , & Friedman , R. S. ( 2007 ) .
Seven principles of goal activation : A systematic approach to distinguishing goal priming from priming of non-goal con- structs .
Personality and Social Psychology Review , 11 ( 3 ) , 211–233 .
http : //dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/1088868307303029 .
Freitas , A. L. , Gollwitzer , P. M. , & Trope , Y .
( 2004 ) .
The influence of abstract and concrete mindsets on anticipating and guiding others ' self-regulatory efforts .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 40 ( 6 ) , 739–752 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp .
2004.04.003 .
Fujita , K. , & Roberts , J. C. ( 2010 ) .
Promoting prospective self-control through abstraction .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 46 ( 6 ) , 1049–1054 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .
1016/j.jesp.2010.05.013 .
Fujita , K. , Eyal , T. , Chaiken , S. , Trope , Y. , & Liberman , N. ( 2008 ) .
Influencing attitudes to- ward near and distant objects .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 44 ( 3 ) , 562–572 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2007.10.005 .
Gollwitzer , P. M. , & Bayer , U .
( 1999 ) .
Deliberative versus implemental mindsets in the control of action .
In S. Chaiken , & Y. Trope ( Eds .
) , Dual-process theories in social psy- chology ( pp .
403–422 ) .
New York , NY : Guilford Press .
Gollwitzer , P. M. , & Brandstätter , V. ( 1997 ) .
Implementation intentions and effective goal pursuit .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 73 ( 1 ) , 186–199 .
http : //dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/0022-3514.73.1.186 .
Gollwitzer , P. M. , & Liu , C. ( 1995 ) .
Wiederaufnahme [ Resumption ] .
In J. Kuhl , & H. Heckhausen ( Eds .
) , Enzyklopaedie der psychologie : Motivation , volition und handlung [ Encyclopedia of psychology : Motivation , volition , and action ] .
C4 .
( pp .
209–240 ) .
Goettingen , Germany : Hogrefe .
Gollwitzer , P. M. , & Moskowitz , G. B .
( 1996 ) .
Goal effects on action and cognition .
In E. T. Higgins , & A. W. Kruglanski ( Eds .
) , Social psychology : Handbook of basic principles ( pp .
361–399 ) .
New York , NY : Guilford Press .
Gross , J. J. , & John , O. P. ( 2003 ) .
Individual differences in two emotion regulation process- es : Implications for affect , relationships , and well-being .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 85 ( 2 ) , 348–362 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.85.2.348 .
Guerra , M. ( 2013 ) .
Coping with stress and uncertainty .
Retrieved from University of Illi- nois Wellness Center website : http : //www.campusrec.illinois.edu/wellnesscenter/ underPressure/coping_socialSupport.html Han , J. K. , & Schmitt , B. H. ( 1997 ) .
Product-category dynamics and corporate identity in brand extensions : A comparison of Hong Kong and US consumers .
Journal of International Marketing , 77–92http : //www.jstor.org/stable/25048683 Hansen , J. , & Wänke , M. ( 2010 ) .
Truth from language and truth from fit : The impact of linguistic concreteness and level of construal on subjective truth .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 36 ( 11 ) , 1576–1588 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/ 0146167210386238 .
Hassin , R. R. , Aarts , H. , Eitam , B. , Custers , R. , & Kleiman , T. ( 2009 ) .
Non-conscious goal pur- suit and the effortful control of behavior .
In E. Morsella , J .
A. Bargh , & P. M. Gollwitzer ( Eds .
) , Oxford handbook of human action : Social cognition and social neuroscience ( pp .
549–566 ) .
New York , NY : Oxford University Press .
Hastie , R. ( 1980 ) .
Memory for behavioral information that confirms or contradicts a per- sonality impression .
In R. Hastie , T. M. Ostrom , & E. B. Ebbesen ( Eds .
) , Person memory : The cognitive basis of social perception ( pp .
155–178 ) .
Hillsdale , N.J. : Erlbaum .
Hauser-Cram , P. , Sirin , S. R. , & Stipek , D. ( 2003 ) .When teachers ' and parents ' values differ : Teachers ' ratings of academic competence in children from low-income families .
Journal of Educational Psychology , 95 ( 4 ) , 813–820 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022- 0663.95.4.813 .
Haws , K. L. , & Poynor , C. ( 2008 ) .
Seize the day !
Encouraging indulgence for the hyperopic consumer .
Journal of Consumer Research , 35 ( 4 ) , 680–691 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1086/ 592129 .
Helzer , E. G. , & Edwards , J .
A .
( 2012 ) .
Causal uncertainty prompts abstract construal of be- havior .
Social Cognition , 30 ( 5 ) , 519–536 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1521/soco.2012.30.5 .
519 .
Higgins , E. T. ( 2000 ) .
Making a good decision : Value from fit .
American Psychologist , 55 ( 11 ) , 1217–1230 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.11.1217 .
Higgins , E. T. , Idson , L. C. , Freitas , A. L. , Spiegel , S. , & Molden , D. C. ( 2003 ) .
Transfer of value from fit .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 84 ( 6 ) , 1140–1153 .
http : //dx.doi .
org/10.1037/0022-3514.84.6.1140 .
70 J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71Hogg , M. A .
( 2000 ) .
Subjective uncertainty reduction through self-categorization : A moti- vational theory of social identity processes .
European Review of Social Psychology , 11 ( 1 ) , 223–255 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1080/14792772043000040 .
Kerley , P. ( 2011 ) .
How businesses can survive a product recall using social media .
Social Media Retrieved from Mashable website : http : //mashable.com/2011/03/28/social- media-product-recalls .
Kim , H. , Rao , A. R. , & Lee , A. Y .
( 2009 ) .
It 's time to vote : The effect of matching message orientation and temporal frame on political persuasion .
Journal of Consumer Research , 35 ( 6 ) , 877–889 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1086/593700 .
Kross , E. , Ayduk , O. , & Mischel , W. ( 2005 ) .
When asking “ why ” does not hurt : Distinguishing rumination from reflective processing of negative emotions .
Psychological Science , 16 ( 9 ) , 709–715 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2005 .
01600.x .
Kruglanski , A. W. , & Webster , D. M. ( 1996 ) .
Motivated closing of the mind : ‘ Seizing ’ and ‘ freezing ’ .
Psychological Review , 103 ( 2 ) , 263–283 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033- 295X.103.2.263 .
Kunda , Z .
( 1990 ) .
The case for motivated reasoning .
Psychological Bulletin , 108 ( 3 ) , 480–498 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.108.3.480 .
Laran , J. , & Janiszewski , C. ( 2009 ) .
Behavioral consistency and inconsistency in the resolu- tion of goal conflict .
Journal of Consumer Research , 35 ( 6 ) , 967–984 .
http : //dx.doi.org/ 10.1086/593293 .
Lemay , E. P. , Jr. , & Neal , A. M. ( 2013 ) .
The wishful memory of interpersonal responsive- ness .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 104 ( 4 ) , 653–672 .
http : //dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/a0030422 .
Lerner , M. J .
( 1980 ) .
The belief in a just world : A fundamental delusion .
New York , NY : Ple- num Press .
Lerner , M. J. , & Simmons , C. H. ( 1966 ) .
Observer 's reaction to the “ innocent victim ” : Com- passion or rejection ?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 4 ( 2 ) , 203–210 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0023562 .
Liberman , N. , & Förster , J .
( 2000 ) .
Expression after suppression : A motivational explana- tion of postsuppressional rebound .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 79 ( 2 ) , 190–203 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.79.2.190 .
Liberman , N. , Sagristano , M .
D. , & Trope , Y .
( 2002 ) .
The effect of temporal distance on level of mental construal .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 38 ( 6 ) , 523–534 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-1031 ( 02 ) 00535-8 .
Loth , R. ( 2009 ) .
An election portrait , offering detail if not big picture .
Retrieved from Boston.com website http : //articles.boston.com/2009-09-06/ae/29265688_1_ campaign-political-junkies-mccain .
Maass , A. , Ceccarelli , R. , & Rudin , S. ( 1996 ) .
Linguistic intergroup bias : Evidence for in- group-protective motivation .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 71 ( 3 ) , 512–526 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.71.3.512 .
Maass , A. , Milesi , A. , Zabbini , S. , & Stahlberg , D. ( 1995 ) .
Linguistic intergroup bias : Differ- ential expectancies or in-group protection ?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 68 ( 1 ) , 116–126 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.68.1.116 .
Maass , A. , Salvi , D. , Arcuri , L. , & Semin , G. R. ( 1989 ) .
Language use in intergroup contexts : The linguistic intergroup bias .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 ( 6 ) , 981–993 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.57.6.981 .
Marksberry , P. ( 2012 ) .
The modern theory of the Toyota production system : A systems inqui- ry of the world 's most emulated and profitable management system .
Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press .
Martin , L. L. , & Tesser , A .
( 2009 ) .
Five markers of motivated behavior .
In G. B. Moskowitz , & H. Grant ( Eds .
) , The psychology of goals ( pp .
257–276 ) .
New York , NY : Guilford Press .
Mezulis , A. H. , Abramson , L. Y. , Hyde , J. S. , & Hankin , B. L. ( 2004 ) .
Is there a universal pos- itivity bias in attributions ?
A meta-analytic review of individual , developmental , and cultural differences in the self-serving attributional bias .
Psychological Bulletin , 130 ( 5 ) , 711–747 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.130.5.711 .
Mittal , C. , & Griskevicius , V. ( 2014 ) .
Sense of control under uncertainty depends on people 's childhood environment : A life history theory approach .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 107 ( 4 ) , 621–637 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037398 .
Monga , A .
B. , & John , D. R. ( 2007 ) .
Cultural differences in brand extension evaluation : The influence of analytic versus holistic thinking .
Journal of Consumer Research , 33 ( 4 ) , 529–536 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1086/510227 .
Moskowitz , G. B .
( 2002 ) .
Preconscious effects of temporary goals on attention .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 38 ( 4 ) , 397–404 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022- 1031 ( 02 ) 00001-X .
Murray , S. L. , & Holmes , J. G. ( 1997 ) .
A leap of faith ?
Positive illusions in romantic relation- ships .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 23 ( 6 ) , 586–604 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .
1177/0146167297236003 .
Nagourney , A .
( 2011 ) .
Facing challenge , Obama returns to unity theme .
News Analysis Re- trieved from The New York Times website : http : //www.nytimes.com/2011/01/13/ us/13assess.html .
Namkoong , J .
-E. , & Henderson , M. D. ( 2014 ) .
It 's simple and I know it !
Abstract construals reduce causal uncertainty .
Social Psychological and Personality Science , 5 ( 3 ) , 352–359 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/1948550613499240 .
Neuberg , S. L. ( 1989 ) .
The goal of forming accurate impressions during social interactions : Attenuating the impact of negative expectancies .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 56 ( 3 ) , 374–386 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.56.3.374 .
Nisbett , R. E. , Peng , K. , Choi , I. , & Norenzayan , A .
( 2001 ) .
Culture and systems of thought : Holistic versus analytic cognition .
Psychological Review , 108 ( 2 ) , 291–310 .
http : //dx .
doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.108.2.291 .
Oettingen , G. , Grant , H. , Smith , P. K. , Skinner , M. , & Gollwitzer , P. M. ( 2006 ) .
Nonconscious goal pursuit : Acting in an explanatory vacuum .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 42 ( 5 ) , 668–675 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2005.10.003 .
Papies , E. K. , Stroebe , W. , & Aarts , H. ( 2008 ) .
The allure of forbidden food : On the role of attention in self-regulation .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 44 ( 5 ) , 1283–1292 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2008.04.008.Reis , H. T. , Sheldon , K. M. , Gable , S. L. , Roscoe , J. , & Ryan , R. M. ( 2000 ) .
Daily well-being : The role of autonomy , competence , and relatedness .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 26 ( 4 ) , 419–435 ( 1177/0146167200266002 ) .
Reyna , V. F. ( 2012 ) .
A new intuitionism : Meaning , memory , and development in fuzzy- trace theory .
Judgment and Decision Making , 7 ( 3 ) , 332–359 ( PMC4268540 ) .
Rios , K. , Markman , K. D. , Schroeder , J. , & Dyczewski , E. A .
( 2014 ) .
A ( creative ) portrait of the uncertain individual self-uncertainty and individualism enhance creative genera- tion .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 1050–1062 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/ 0146167214535640 .
Schwarz , N. ( 2001 ) .
Feelings as information : Implications for affective influences on infor- mation processing .
In L. L. Martin , & G. L. Clore ( Eds .
) , Theories of mood and cognition : A user 's guidebook ( pp .
159–176 ) .
Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum .
Schwarz , N. , & Clore , G. L. ( 1983 ) .
Mood , misattribution , and judgments of well-being : In- formative and directive functions of affective states .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 45 ( 3 ) , 513–523 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.45.3.513 .
Sherman , J. W. , & Frost , L. A .
( 2000 ) .
On the encoding of stereotype-relevant information under cognitive load .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 26 ( 1 ) , 26–34 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167200261003 .
Sherman , J.W. , Conrey , F. R. , & Groom , C. J .
( 2004 ) .
Encoding flexibility revisited : Evidence for enhanced encoding of stereotype-inconsistent information under cognitive load .
Social Cognition , 22 ( 2 ) , 214–232 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1521/soco.22.2.214.35464 .
Sherman , J. W. , Lee , A. Y. , Bessenoff , G. R. , & Frost , L. A .
( 1998 ) .
Stereotype efficiency reconsidered : Encoding flexibility under cognitive load .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 75 ( 3 ) , 589–606 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.75.3 .
589 .
Shu , L. L. , Gino , F. , & Bazerman , M. H. ( 2011 ) .
Dishonest deed , clear conscience : When cheating leads to moral disengagement and motivated forgetting .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 37 ( 3 ) , 330–349 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/ 0146167211398138 .
Smith , P. K. , & Trope , Y .
( 2006 ) .
You focus on the forest when you 're in charge of the trees : Power priming and abstract information processing .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 90 ( 4 ) , 578–596 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.90.4.578 .
Srull , T. K. ( 1981 ) .
Personmemory : Some tests of associative storage and retrieval models .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 7 ( 6 ) , 440–463 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.7.6.440 .
Srull , T. K. ( 1987 ) .
Memory , mood , and consumer judgment .
Advances in Consumer Research , 14 ( 1 ) , 404–407 http : //acrwebsite.org/volumes/9825/volumes/v14/NA-14 .
Taber , C. S. , & Lodge , M. ( 2006 ) .
Motivated skepticism in the evaluation of political beliefs .
American Journal of Political Science , 50 ( 3 ) , 755–769 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1111/j .
1540-5907.2006.00214.x .
Tiedens , L. Z. , & Linton , S. ( 2001 ) .
Judgment under emotional certainty and uncertainty : The effects of specific emotions on information processing .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 81 ( 6 ) , 973–988 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.81.6 .
973 .
Tobin , S. J. , & Weary , G. ( 2008 ) .
The effects of causal uncertainty , causal importance , and initial attitude on attention to causal persuasive arguments .
Social Cognition , 26 ( 1 ) , 44–65 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1521/soco.2008.26.1.44 .
Trope , Y. , & Liberman , N. ( 2003 ) .
Temporal construal .
Psychological Review , 110 ( 3 ) , 403–421 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.110.3.403 .
Trope , Y. , & Liberman , N. ( 2011 ) .
Construal level theory .
In P. A. M. V. Lange , A. W. Kruglanski , & E. T. Higgins ( Eds .
) , Handbook of theories of social psychology .
1 .
( pp .
118–134 ) .
London , UK : Sage Publications Ltd. Ülkümen , G. , Chakravarti , A. , & Morwitz , V. G. ( 2010 ) .
Categories create mind-sets : The ef- fect of exposure to broad versus narrow categorizations on subsequent , unrelated de- cisions .
Journal of Marketing Research , 47 ( 4 ) , 659–671 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1509/ jmkr.47.4.659 .
Updegraff , J .
A. , & Suh , E. M. ( 2007 ) .
Happiness is a warm abstract thought : Self-construal abstractness and subjective well-being .
The Journal of Positive Psychology , 2 ( 1 ) , 18–28 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1080/17439760601069150 .
Vallacher , R. R. , & Wegner , D. M. ( 1987 ) .
What do people think they 're doing ?
Action identification and human behavior .
Psychological Review , 94 ( 1 ) , 3–15 .
http : //dx.doi .
org/10.1037/0033-295X.94.1.3 .
Vallacher , R. R. , & Wegner , D. M. ( 1989 ) .
Levels of personal agency : Individual variation in action identification .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 ( 4 ) , 660–671 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.57.4.660 .
Van den Bos , K. , & Lind , E. A .
( 2002 ) .
Uncertainty management by means of fairness judg- ments .
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , 34 , 1–60 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .
1016/S0065-2601 ( 02 ) 80003-X .
Van Dijk , E. , & Zeelenberg , M. ( 2007 ) .
When curiosity killed regret : Avoiding or seeking the unknown in decision-making under uncertainty .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 43 ( 4 ) , 656–662 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2006.06.004 .
Vaughn , L. A. , & Weary , G. ( 2003 ) .
Causal uncertainty and correction of judgments .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 39 ( 5 ) , 516–524 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022- 1031 ( 03 ) 00028-3 .
Veling , H. , Holland , R. W. , & van Knippenberg , A .
( 2008 ) .
When approach motivation and behavioral inhibition collide : Behavior regulation through stimulus devaluation .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 44 ( 4 ) , 1013–1019 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .
1016/j.jesp.2008.03.004 .
Veltkamp , M. , Aarts , H. , & Custers , R. ( 2008 ) .
Perception in the service of goal pursuit : Motivation to attain goals enhances the perceived size of goal-instrumental ob- jects .
Social Cognition , 26 ( 6 ) , 720–736 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1521/soco.2008.26.6 .
720 .
Verplanken , B. , & Holland , R. W. ( 2002 ) .
Motivated decision making : Effects of acti- vation and self-centrality of values on choices and behavior .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 82 ( 3 ) , 434–447 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 0022-3514.82.3.434 .
71J.-E. Namkoong , M.D .
Henderson / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 64 ( 2016 ) 57–71Vess , M. , Arndt , J. , & Schlegel , R. J .
( 2011 ) .
Abstract construal levels attenuate state self- esteem reactivity .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 47 ( 4 ) , 861–864 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2011.02.014 .
Villarica , H. , & Bailey , N. ( 2009 ) .
The internet and cancer : How online social network- ing is revolutionizing cancer healthcare .
Retrieved from Helix website http : // scienceinsociety.northwestern.edu/content/articles/2009/internet-and-cancer- how-online-social-networking-revolutionizing-cancer-health Watkins , E. , Moberly , N. J. , & Moulds , M. L. ( 2008 ) .
Processing mode causally influences emotional reactivity : Distinct effects of abstract versus concrete construal on emo- tional response .
Emotion , 8 ( 3 ) , 364–378 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/1528-3542.8.3 .
364 .
Weary , G. , & Jacobson , J .
A .
( 1997 ) .
Causal uncertainty beliefs and diagnostic information seeking .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 73 ( 4 ) , 839–848 .
http : //dx.doi .
org/10.1037/0022-3514.73.4.839 .
Weary , G. , Tobin , S. J. , & Edwards , J .
A .
( 2010 ) .
The causal uncertaintymodel revisited .
In R. M. Arkin , K. C. Oleson , & P. J. Carroll ( Eds .
) , Handbook of the uncertain self ( pp .
78–100 ) .
New York , NY : Psychology Press .
Weary , G. , Vaughn , L. A. , Stewart , B. D. , & Edwards , J .
A .
( 2006 ) .
Adjusting for the corre- spondence bias : Effects of causal uncertainty , cognitive busyness , and causal strength of situational information .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 42 ( 1 ) , 87–94 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2005.01.003 .
Weiner , B .
( 1965 ) .
Need achievement and the resumption of incompleted tasks .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1 ( 2 ) , 165–168 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/ h0021642 .
Weinstein , N. , & Ryan , R. M. ( 2010 ) .
When helping helps : Autonomous motivation for prosocial behavior and its influence on well-being for the helper and recipient.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 98 ( 2 ) , 222–244 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .
1037/a0016984 .
Weinstein , N. D. ( 1980 ) .
Unrealistic optimism about future life events .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 39 ( 5 ) , 806–820 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022- 3514.39.5.806 .
Wheaton , S. ( 2011 ) .
Executive consolation .
Retrieved from The New York Times website http : //www.nytimes.com/interactive/2011/01/13/us/20110113_CONSOLATION_ INTERACTIVE.html White , K. , MacDonnell , R. , & Dahl , D. W. ( 2011 ) .
It 's the mind-set that matters : The role of construal level and message framing in influencing consumer efficacy and conserva- tion behaviors .
Journal of Marketing Research , 48 ( 3 ) , 472–485 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10 .
1509/jmkr.48.3.472 .
Wilcox , K. , Vallen , B. , Block , L. , & Fitzsimons , G. J .
( 2009 ) .
Vicarious goal fulfillment : When the mere presence of a healthy option leads to an ironically indulgent decision .
Journal of Consumer Research , 36 ( 3 ) , 380–393 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1086/599219 .
Wilson , T. D. , Centerbar , D. B. , Kermer , D. A. , & Gilbert , D. T. ( 2005 ) .
The pleasures of un- certainty : Prolonging positive moods in ways people do not anticipate .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 88 ( 1 ) , 5–21 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514 .
88.1.5 .
Wong , P. T. , & Weiner , B .
( 1981 ) .
When people ask “ why ” questions , and the heuristics of attributional search .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 40 ( 4 ) , 650–663 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.40.4.650 .
