Ors_JournLabEco_2013_mZVR.pdf
aBOViUmTi.iduazHaMr1Hg3vTA7G-Ors_JournLabEco_2013_mZVR.pdf.plain.html

Performance Gender Gap : Does Competition Matter ?
Evren Ors , HEC Paris and CEPR Frédéric Palomino , EDHEC Business School Eloı̈c Peyrache , HEC Paris Using data for students undertaking a series of real-world aca- demic examinations with high future payoffs , we examine whether the differences in these evaluations ’ competitive nature generate a performance gender gap .
In the univariate setting we find that wom- en ’ s performance is first-order stochastically dominated by that of men when the competition is higher , whereas the reverse holds true in the less competitive or noncompetitive tests .
These results are con- firmed in the multivariate setting .
Our findings , from a real-world setting with important payoffs at stake , are in line with the evidence from experimental research that finds that females tend to perform worse inmore competitive contexts .
I .
Introduction A new line of research , mainly experimental , suggests that there are per- formance differences among males and females in competitive environ- ments .
For example , Gneezy , Niederle , andRustichini ð2003Þ find thatmen ’ s Wewould like to thank Jeffrey Smith ðthe associate editorÞ , David Thesmar , and participants at the 2008 Centre for Economic Policy Research/Research Training Network Conference on Economics of Education and Education Policy in Europe in Amsterdam ðOctober 24–25 , 2008Þ for their helpful comments .
We also would like to thank Bernard Ramanantsoa ðdean ofHECParisÞ and ThierryDebay ðdirec- tor of La Direction des Admissions et ConcoursÞ for allowing us to access the con- fidential entrance exam data , Virginie Charton and Xavier Lecoustillier for their [ Journal of Labor Economics , 2013 , vol .
31 , no .
3 ] © 2013 by The University of Chicago .
All rights reserved .
0734-306X/2013/3103-0001 $ 10.00 443 performance increases as the competitiveness of the experimental test in- creases , while that of females does not .
Similarly , Niederle and Vesterlund ð2007Þ observe that , after experiencing both noncompetitive and competitive tournament-type tasks in experiments , males show a much larger preference for competitive tournament-type tasks than females ð73 % for the former as opposed to 35 % for the latterÞ .
However , evidence from more recent em- pirical studies that use field data does not necessarily point to a performance difference across genders in competitive setups .
While Kleinjans ð2009Þ finds that women have a greater distaste for competition , Lavy ð2008bÞ finds no gender-based difference in a rank-order tournament among high school teachers in which prizes are based on their students ’ performance , whereas Paserman ð2010Þ , examining the performance of highly competitive profes- sional tennis players during grand-slam tournaments , finds no difference in forced errors across genders during critical points of the game .
In a recent addition to this literature , Jurajda andMunich ð2011Þ examinemultiple uni- versity entrance exams taken by the same individuals and find that women do not shy away from applying to more competitive institutions , but men perform better than women in entrance exams for these more prestigious institutions , even though no such difference exists for the exams of the less competitive schools .
The main contribution of our article is to add to this growing literature on gender gap in performance by comparing real-world academic achieve- ment examinations between men and women in contexts characterized by different levels of competition for the same group of subjects .
Our field data come from a series of academic tests for the same individuals in a set- ting in which future , career-related , payoffs are economically high .
While these academic achievement tests are not directly comparable with the more controlled environment of laboratory experiments used in the literature , our findings suggest in a parallel vein that performance differences arise across genders when the competitiveness of the tests increases .
Specifically , we examine three cohorts of candidates over the period 2005–7 taking the competitive entrance exam for admission to the Master of Science in Management ðhereafter MScÞ at Ecole des Hautes Etudes Commerciales in Paris ðhereafter HEC ; recently changed officially to HEC ParisÞ , a busi- ness school that is ranked first in France and in Europe .
Only 380 out of approximately 3,400 candidates are admitted each year following a series of written and oral exams .
The entrance exam takes place over 3 weeks and cov- ers a wide variety of subjects , including mathematics , history and geogra- phy , French , two foreign languages , and “ general culture ” ða mixture of sociology , philosophy , and current eventsÞ as well as the ability to debate a help creating the proprietary database , and Deborah Philippe for her research as- sistance .
An earlier version of this article circulated as the Centre for Economic Pol- icy Research discussion paper no .
6891 .
All errors remain our own .
Contact the corresponding author , EvrenOrs , at ors @ hec.fr .
444 Ors et al .
topic .
Inour analysis , we first compare the performance differences between males and females coming from similar educational backgrounds during the written and oral exam stages of the selection process inwhich the candidates compete for a limited number of places that are available.1 Thenwe compare the performances of the same population before and after the entrance exam during the high school finishing exam ðthe French baccalauréatÞ and during their first-year core courses at HEC ðfor candidates admitted to the schoolÞ .
Unlike the HEC entrance exam , the baccalauréat does not have a pre- determined number of seats for the successful candidates and has drasti- cally lower failure rates ðapproximately 15 % as opposed to an 89 % failure rate for the entrance examÞ .
Once admitted to the school , the students face a series of academic assessments in a much less competitive environment .
While HEC asks professors to follow a grading scheme based on a “ curve ” and suggests that the bottom 10 % of the grade distribution can be given an F , less than 1 % of the first-year core courses ’ letter grades are fails .
In fact , the proportion of students failing and having to repeat their first year is approximately 1 % of the 380 who are admitted to the school .
These dif- ferences suggest that the HEC entrance exam , which selects the highest- ranked 380 candidates , is a much more competitive setting than the latter two academic evaluations .
Given the structure of the HEC selection pro- cess , we specifically consider the upper tail of the performance distributions .
Our main result is that men perform better than women at the very competitive HEC admission contest , despite the fact that ðiÞ in the same cohort of candidates , the females performed significantly better than men in the “ noncompetitive ” national baccalauréat exam ðsince the number of diplomas awarded is not predetermined and one candidate obtaining the diploma has no bearing on the other candidatesÞ 2 years prior to the sitting of the HEC admission exam ; and ðiiÞ among the subsample of candidates admitted to the school , females appear to outperform the same males dur- ing the first year of the HEC ’ s MSc program ðwhere grades are based on relative performances in a very loose senseÞ but only in the nonmathematics- oriented classes.2 More precisely , using quantile regressions , we show that men perform better than women during the written exam stage at the 25th , 50th , 75th , and 90th percentiles ðbut not at the 10th percentileÞ , the observed perfor- 1 As discussed further below , in order to eliminate differences in educational backgrounds as a possible driver of a gender performance gap that we observe , we focus on a sample of 5,750 science track candidates ðover three cohortsÞ , which form the largest group among the candidate pool .
While there are no quotas for any type of background , approximately 250 of the 380 admitted to HEC come from a scientific background in high school .
2 The fact that we deem the baccalauréat as noncompetitive and the first-year of HEC as less competitive does not mean that these are nonstressful events.What we claim is that the resulting pressures during the latter two exams are lower , in a relative sense , than those engendered by the HEC entrance exam .
Performance Gender Gap 445 mance differences being statistically significant at the 1 % level .
As only roughly a quarter of the initial candidate pool is allowed to proceed to the oral exams ’ stage of the admission process , the men ’ s proportion increases during the second round of the admission process .
Estimates of quantile regressions for the oral exams at the 25th , 50th , and 75th percentiles sug- gest that females ’ overall performance remains lower than that ofmales only at the 75th percentile , a result that is statistically significant at the 10 % level .
Consequently , more men are admitted to HEC than women .
To examine the impact of the selection process on the performance of the same cohorts , we first estimate linear probability models for the bac- calauréat honors using ordinary least squares ðOLSÞ.3 We observe that the probability of obtaining honors is higher for women compared to men , the result being statistically different from zero at the 1 % level , irrespective of the honors level considered .
When we run OLS regressions using first- year grade point average ðGPAÞ or letter grades and control for all the ob- servable characteristics at our disposal , we find some evidence that women perform better thanmen : overall , women ’ s GPA or course grades are higher than those of men , but only in the nonmathematics-oriented courses ðwe observe no statistically significant difference in performance when we con- sider all the grades or the mathematics gradesÞ .
This is surprising : a priori , we would not expect to find any performance difference among a group of students who have excelled in a highly competitive elimination process and succeeded in entering HEC .
Taken together , these results suggest that the higher competitive pressure in the exam that puts more emphasis on relative performance has a different impact on men than on women .
Next , we consider alternative explanations for the changes in perfor- mance that we observe for the same subjects in settings in which compet- itiveness differs in a relative sense .
One possibility is that gender discrim- ination or bias by exam evaluators may be driving our results ðas in Goldin and Rouse 2000Þ .
For example , while the written exam copies are graded after being rendered anonymous , we can not rule out the possibility that some graders may be able to discern the genders thanks to the candidates ’ handwriting style .
However , we do not believe that this or a similar dis- crimination during the oral exams would result in a bias that is material enough to affect our results for three reasons .
First , even if some graders may be able to discern the gender of the candidate through handwriting style differences , they would need to be biased toward one gender or the other , which is not obvious given that the examiners come from both sexes ðe.g. , Lavy 2008aÞ .
Second , our main performance metric is a weighted average of all ðwritten or oralÞ exam grades in different subjects .
For any 3 Because of data restrictions , honors are the only performance metric available to us for the baccalauréat exam .
446 Ors et al .
potential gender discrimination to affect our results systematically , one or more fields would have to be graded by one or more groups of examiners with a similar bias .
This is difficult to achieve given that the number of copies to be graded in the science track alone is 1,900 per year on aver- age per subject matter .
The fact that we are using weighted-average exam scores across different fields suggests that any possible bias that a few indi- vidual examiners may exhibit would be largely diluted .
Finally , it is highly unlikely that HEC administration would have given us access to the data if there were any suspicions of gender bias in the admission exam : given the predominant status of the institution among French business schools , our research question is a delicate one for the general public and HEC.4 Our results are also unlikely to be explained by a “ women shying away from competition ” argument : in our data set the proportion of female candidates in the initial candidate pool with a science background ð49.2 % Þ is 2 % –3 % higher than the proportion of females graduating from high school with a science major over the same period ð46.6 % in 2005 , 46.2 % in 2006 , and 47.3 % in 2007Þ .
The fact that there are more females in the candidate pool than among the relevant population of high school gradu- ates rules out stories based on a selection mechanism that men and women share in common , even though we can not rule out , on the basis of this information , more general stories involving different selectionmechanisms for men and women.5 Given that the candidates who take the HEC entrance exam follow the samenumber of years of schooling , human capital differences aremost likely to be driven by innate abilities as opposed to differences in backgrounds .
It is possible that women ’ s attitudes toward family and childbearing may en- genderdifferences in their investment ineducation ðsee , e.g. , Ge2011Þ , which may explain the lower initial proportion of female candidates ð49.16 % vs. 50.84 % for malesÞ in the applicant pool .
However , these potential differ- ences in attitudes are unlikely to explain differences in performance during the entrance exam or the systematic change that we observe in the bacca- lauréat or the first year of HEC .
We also explore whether gender differences in mathematics affinity may matter for our results .
While we observe some statistically significant per- 4 In fact , an earlier version of this article was covered in the French press ðe.g. , Le Monde 2009Þ , generating a nonnegligible amount of debate about the findings .
5 Evidence suggests that genders ’ attitude toward competition has a cultural com- ponent : Gneezy , Leonard , and List ð2009Þ find that while men among the Maasai in Tanzania , a patriarchal society , tend to participate in competitive tasks at twice the rate of women , the reverse is observed in the matrilineal society of the Khasi in India .
We do not know of any study that examines the variation in the differences that gen- ders exhibit regarding their participation in competitive tasks for different subsamples that share the same culture .
Performance Gender Gap 447 formance differences across genders involving subjects that are mathemat- ics and nonmathematics oriented , these are not systematic enough to ex- plain all our main findings .
In certain cases we obtain similar results with the mathematics and the nonmathematics exams .
For example , in quantile regressions of the written exam performance , males perform better than females at the 25th , 50th , 75th , and 90th percentiles of the data , irrespec- tive of whether the content is mathematics or nonmathematics oriented .
In other cases , we observe differences that indicate that females doworse in nonmathematics fields .
For example , in quantile regressions of oral exam performance , females doworse ða result that is statistically significantÞ than males at the 75th percentile in the nonmathematics exams , while we ob- serve no such difference at the 75th percentile of the mathematics exam .
Yet again , in other instances women do better in nonmathematics-oriented sub- jects , for example , during the first-year courses , while they do no worse in the mathematics-oriented courses .
We also note that the implicit weights given to mathematics-related fields in the three different academic evalua- tions that we examine do not vary systematically to disadvantage the females during the entrance exam , while giving them an edge in the other two tests.6 We then conclude that the gender-related academic performance differences that we observe are closely linked with the differences in the competitive pressures inherent in these evaluations .
Our data set is relevant and interesting for the study of the gender dif- ferences in performances for several reasons .
First , payoffs at stake are very high since the Financial Times ðFTÞ has ranked HEC ’ s MSc in Man- agement program first in Europe in 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 , the three years in our sample.7 For these three years the average annual salary of HEC MSc alumni 3 years after graduation is approximately US $ 13,000 ðinter- national purchasing power parity adjusted as reported by the FTÞ higher than that of the closest follower in France .
This amount corresponds to 24.5 % of the average salary ð $ 53,000 over 2005–7Þ of the alumni of the busi- ness school that is typically ranked the second in France ðESSECÞ .
The salary spread increases to almost $ 24,000 betweenHEC and the last-ranked French business school in theFTsurveyduring2005–7 ðwhichcorresponds to57 % of the average salary for alumni of the least-well-ranked French school in the FT classificationÞ.8 Even in 2011 , when HEC was ranked fourth in the FT rankings for MSc in Management , the average starting salary of its graduates was more than $ 8,600 higher than that of the graduates of the first-ranked 6 We also note that other unobservable differences across genders , such as risk aversion , may play a role in our findings .
Unfortunately , we are limited by the data at our disposal in exploring the role , if any , of these additional factors .
7 The HEC MSc in Management program was ranked first in Europe in 2008 , second in 2009 , third in 2010 , and fourth in 2011 .
8 See http : //rankings.ft.com/businessschoolrankings/masters-in-management .
448 Ors et al .
business school in France ðEcole Supérieur de Commerce de Paris ½ESCPÞ in that year , a difference that equals 13 % of the average salary of the latter school ’ s alumni .
Not only do HEC alumni perform very well early in their career ðwhich they typically start at the age of 24Þ , they also do well in the long run : among the 32 French firms ranked in the FT Global 500 in 2007 , which includes the world ’ s 500 largest companies by market value , 22 % have a chief executive officer who graduated fromHEC .
The school ’ s alumni also include seven French government ministers .
In a different vein , Pascal LamyandDominiqueStrauss-Kahn , twoHECalumni , are , respectively , the director of theWorld Trade Organization and the ex–managing director of the InternationalMonetaryFund.These examples illustrate short- and long- term rewards , and hence the incentives , of being admitted to the school .
Second , a priori , we should not observe any difference in performance across genders in this pool of candidates given that we examine highly competitive individuals compared to their age group in the general French population since ðiÞ they are among the very best-performing French high school seniors as measured by the honors that they obtain in the bacca- lauréat,9 ðiiÞ they have chosen to apply to and have been admitted to se- lective preparatory schools that train students during 2 years for business school entrance exams , and ðiiiÞ they self-select to sit for the toughest of such exams despite the fact that they are guaranteed admission to a French university in any year following their high school graduation .
As a result , the research question that we examine is not trivial .
If anything , the com- petitive nature of the group of students that we examine should make it more difficult for us to find any differences in performance across genders .
Third , we are able to observe the performance of this motivated group of individuals in academic evaluations that exhibit large differences in their conditions for success.Oneparticularityof the setups thatweexamine is that the success at the HEC entrance exam is based on relative performance in a strict sense for a given year ðonly the top 380 performers are admittedÞ .
In contrast , in the baccalauréat exam , there is no predetermined number of high school diplomas to be granted .
Students who obtain an average grade of 10 or higher out of 20 get their diploma .
For these reasons we consider the baccalauréat to be a noncompetitive setting .
Competition is also very mild in the HEC first-year core course phase .
The school follows the European Credit Transfer System ðECTSÞ standard for grading distributions , which suggests that 10 % of the class be given an F.10 In our sample the proportion of failing grades is less than 7.5 % of the distribution if one were to consider 9 As we explain further below , this holds true even for those candidates who fail the HEC entrance exam .
10 ECTS is a pan-European grading standard underwhich a typical academic year of higher education corresponds to 60 ECTS credits .
The corresponding grading Performance Gender Gap 449 all grades below a D and less than 1 % if one considers only letter grade F ðafter taking a makeup examÞ .
In fact , HEC requires that students validate 50 ECTS credit hours out of the 60 needed for the year .
By this criterion , the number of students failing their first year and repeating it the next year is approximately 1 % of the entering class : of the 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 en- tering classes , three , three , and four students , respectively , repeated part or all of their first year .
As a result , the intensity of the competition for 380 spots out of 3,400 during the entrance exam is drastically higher than that for the first-year HEC courses but also much higher than that for the baccalauréat exam .
Since the baccalauréat and the HEC first-year exams ’ difficulty and their evaluations are most likely to change over time , we do not consider themas being based onfixed standards that remain constant over time ðeven when the nominal threshold for a pass may remain constant , as in the case of the baccalauréatÞ .
What matters for our purpose is the fact that these two sets of exams be relatively less competitive than the HEC entrance exam .
Finally , our sample allows us to rule out differences of earlier orien- tation in education during high school as possible drivers of the gender performance gap .
For that purpose , we focus on science majors , the largest cohort in the HEC entrance exam , and control for the potential differ- ences among the submajors ði.e. , mathematics , physics and chemistry , and life sciencesÞ that they chose in the last year of high school .
Not only do we test for differences in the gender composition of different science sub- majors , but we also explicitly control for them in a multivariate analysis to account for potential differences in mathematics affinity across genders .
The article is organized as follows .
Section II reviews the related lit- erature .
Section III provides an overview of the French higher education system and explains in detail the two-stage HEC admission tournament .
Sections IV and V present the data set and the results , respectively .
Sec- tion VI provides a discussion , and Section VII presents conclusions .
II .
Related Literature Even though the setup we examine is a not direct real-life counterpart to the experimental studies of Gneezy et al .
ð2003Þ and Niederle and Vester- system is very similar to the one used in US universities : course letter grades range from an A for the best-performing students in a class to an F for those who fail the class , with the addition of an E , which is a passing grade that is worse than a D. The ECTS system was introduced in 1999 as part of the so-called Bologna Process that seeks to harmonize educational standards within the European Higher Educa- tion Area with a view to facilitate educational transfers across countries ðhttp : //ec .europa.eu/education/lifelong-learning-policy/doc48_en.htmÞ .
450 Ors et al .
lund ð2007Þ , our results expand the literature on performance differences across genders and complement their results .
Gneezy et al .
observe that as the competitiveness of the environment increases , men ’ s performance in- creases while that of women does not .
Furthermore , they find that the per- formance of women is significantly higher in single-sex tournaments than in noncompetitive treatments , suggesting that the competitive environment in which women operate can affect their performance .
In the experiments run by Niederle and Vesterlund , participants are asked to solve tasks in a noncompetitive environment and then in a competitive tournament envi- ronment .
In a second step , participants are asked to select inwhich of the two environments they want to operate : while 73 % of the men choose to enter the competitive tournament , only 35 % of the women decide to do so .
Our work is also closely related to a growing body of papers on per- formance gender gap using real-life data with conflicting results .
Paserman ð2010Þ finds no difference in forced errors across genders during critical points of grand-slam tennis tournament matches .
His results suggest that , in the context of same-sex tournaments , womendonoworse thanmenwhen competitive pressure increases .
Lavy ð2008bÞ examines the effects of a rank- order tournament among mathematics and language teachers with impor- tant cash prizes that are based on the performances of their students .
He finds no gender-based difference among teachers in terms of performance rank , rate of winning , or prize won .
Moreover , the gender composition of the pool of competitor-teachers in the same school does not appear tomatter , even though women appear to be more pessimistic about teaching out- comes and more realistic about their chances of winning a prize .
Ina similar vein , Delfgaauw et al .
ð2009Þ introduce a performance competition among the stores of a Dutch retail chain , but in contrast to Lavy ð2008bÞ , they find a positive and statistically significant effect on sales-based performance when the manager and most of the employees have the same gender , irrespective of whether a cash prizewas proposed or not .
Our work contributes to this line of literature and is closely related to the recent article by Jurajda and Munich ð2011Þ , who study performance differences across genders during the entrance exams for Czech universi- ties .
They find that while women perform as well as men in entrance exams of lower-ranked universities , their probability of being admitted to top universities is lower than that of men with similar abilities ðas measured by their score in a national high school graduation examÞ .
Our work is different from that of Jurajda and Munich ð2011Þ in several ways .
First , whereas Jurajda and Munich can observe each candidate ’ s multiple university applications , we observe the same candidates in three different exam settings : in the noncompetitive baccalauréat exam , during the highly competitive HEC entrance exam , and during the somewhat com- petitivefirst yearof their studiesonce admitted.Thus , we canobservewhether Performance Gender Gap 451 the gender performance gap observed during the entrance exam exists prior to and after this contest , in less competitive environments .
Second , the en- trance exam that we focus on proceeds in two steps , onewritten and one oral , as opposed to a single set of written evaluations in Jurajda and Munich ’ s study .
As a result , we can test for a gender performance gap in written versus oral settings .
Third , while our data are limited to a single school ’ s entrance exam , as opposed tomanyuniversities ’ admission exams , the admissionpro- cedure that we examine is richer in that it examines students over a larger set of subject matters ðe.g. , mathematics , history and geography , languages , and “ general culture ” during the entrance exam but also accounting , econom- ics , finance , etc .
during the first yearÞ rather than just mathematics and lan- guage skills as in Jurajda andMunich ’ s study .
Hence , we are able to examine whether mathematics affinity is the driver of the gender difference in per- formance .
As such , our findings extend and complement those of Jurajda and Munich .
III .
The French Higher Education System and the HEC Admission Exam This section presents an overview of the French higher education sys- tem so as to provide a better understanding of the competitive pressure and the economic incentives that the subjects we study face during the dif- ferent academic evaluation tests that we examine .
A .
A Two-Tiered Higher Education System At present , higher education in France is dispensed through 81 public universities and 202 grandes écoles .
The history of the current system can be traced back to the earlier years of the thirteenth century , when the three oldest French universities ðParis , Toulouse , andMontpellierÞwere created .
The first institution of higher learning that was not affiliated with a univer- sity , leCollègeRoyal deParis ðnowcalled leCollège deFranceÞ , was created in 1530 , followed by the first military oceanography and artillery schools in the seventeenth century .
During the eighteenth century , technological advances increased the demand for engineers among army corps officers and led to the creation of other military engineering schools by the royal power.11 Following the French Revolution , similar institutions continued to be created ðincluding Ecole Polytechnique , the most prestigious of French engineering schoolsÞ , with the appearance of nonmilitary independent schools such as the EcoleNormale ðto train secondary school teachers after the expulsion of Jesuits who fulfilled that roleÞ and the transformation of law and medicine faculties of universities into independent law and medi- 11 These include some of the best French engineering schools of the current day , e.g. , Ecole des Ponts et Chaussées , Ecole des Mines , and Ecole des Arts et Métiers .
452 Ors et al .
cal schools ðthese would be subsequently reattached to universitiesÞ .
These independent institutions of higher learning outside the university system , which were typically attached to a military corps or to a government min- istry , will eventually become what is known as the grandes écoles system .
In the nineteenth century , a second wave of occupational schools dedicated to the teaching of business and management began to be created , including the HEC , by the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Paris ðCCIPÞ in 1881.12 The university–grande école duality is still very much present in French higher education and boils down to three major differences among these institutions .
First , the former are not typically allowed to select students who are legally guaranteed a spot in one of the three universities of their choice in the académie of their high school upon graduation , irrespective of their academic level.13 In contrast , starting as early as the eighteenth century , admission to grande école programs involves an entrance exam whose difficulty and selectiveness are very tightly associatedwith the quality and ranking of the school .
Differences in the admission procedures and selection criteria are reflected in the number of students enrolled in the uni- versities and the grandes écoles : during the period 2005–7 ðyears in our sam- pleÞ , approximately 1.4 million students were enrolled in universities ðall fields and years combinedÞ compared to approximately 160,000 in all types of grandes écoles put together ðRERS 2007Þ .
This general difference in selec- tivity is further exacerbated by the competition among the highest-ranked grandes écoles that select the very best candidates through separate entrance exams .
The difficulty of getting into one of the top-ranked schools is closely related with job market outcomes .
It is not too far-fetched to state that typ- ically a French employer , the country ’ s establishment , and even the French public at large would consider the last-ranked candidate entering the first- ranked grande école in a given field to be a better student than the first-ranked student entering the second-ranked school .
In fact , when offered admission from a number of schools , few of those admitted to the first-ranked school would go to a second- or lower-ranked school .
In the case ofHEC , out of 381 12 HEC is the eighth French business school to be created , the first one being an- other school created by the CCIP , the ESCP .
Almost all French business schools are affiliated with , and partially financed by , a chamber of commerce .
The latter receives a tax , called taxe d ’ apprentissage , which businesses headquartered in its geographical area are required to pay .
Nevertheless , French business schools re- quire a tuition that many prestigious engineering grandes écoles do not thanks to their historic affiliation with a ministry of the French state .
13 The French national education system is split into 26 regional units called acad- émies that cover administrative aspects of primary , secondary , and higher education .
These academies typically cover a région , which is a geographic administrative unit of the French state , though some large metropolitan areas , such as the greater Paris region ðnamely , Ile de FranceÞ , are split into more than one academy .
Performance Gender Gap 453 admitted in 2005 and 380 in 2006 and 2007 , only 18 , 15 , and 11 , respectively , chose to go to another school.14 Second , whereas entry at a university takes place right after high school , candidates to grande écoles follow subject-specific preparatory programs for 2 years , which prepare them for the competitive entrance exams .
These 2-year prep schools ðclasses préparatoires , or simply prépa in FrenchÞ fol- low curricula defined at the national level and may be thought of as being the equivalent of freshman and sophomore years in a US college .
Even though these schools do not confer diplomas , students who drop out of them after the first year or fail to enter a grande école of their choice can be awarded ECTS credit hours that they can use toward a university de- gree ’ s credit hour requirements.15 The prep schools are typically associated with public or private high schools but are not organically linked with the grandes écoles.16 Admission to one of the 406 existing prep schools also follows a very selective process .
During their last year of high school , students wishing to enter a prep school of their choice fill out application forms ðmainly providing grades obtained in their last 2 years of high schoolÞ .
In contrast to the university system , students can be rejected from all the prep schools that they apply to .
In fact , prep schools offer different programs given the type of grande école targeted ði.e. , engineering or businessÞ and are ranked by field ði.e. , mathematics , science , economics , or literatureÞ , with the se- lectivity being especially stringent at the very best institutions .
Importantly for us , admission decisions to business prep schools , though conditional on successfully obtaining the high school diploma , are typically made pub- lic before the baccalauréat exam takes place .
In other words , business prep school programs do not select students on the basis of their baccalauréat exam performances .
For example , a top-ranked business prep school pro- 14 The students who chose not to attend HEC typically enrolled in Ecole Normale Supérieur , a research-oriented grande école that prepares for a PhD in economics , humanities , and sciences .
Few students chose a lower-ranked business school over HEC .
The school does not offer additional admissions to replace the students who chose not to enroll .
15 A student can transfer up to 60 ð120Þ ECTS credit hours toward her or his uni- versitydegreeuponsuccessfulcompletionof thefirstyear ðsecondyearÞofprepschool .
16 As of 2007 there were approximately 1,550 public and 1,070 private high schools in France .
The latter group is further subdivided into two .
The first group , called sous-contrat avec l ’ état ði.e. , under contract with the stateÞ , includes institu- tions that follow the French national curriculum , lead to a French baccalauréat , receive aid from the state that appoints some of its teachers , and charge anywhere between €500 and €4,500 per year for tuition .
The overwhelming majority of these institutions are denominational ðtypically CatholicÞ schools .
The second group comprises private high schools that follow other curricula ðAmerican , English , or German , e.g.Þ , lead to international diplomas ðsuch as American or Swiss interna- tional baccalaureate or UKA-levelsÞ , do not receive any state aid , and charge much higher amounts for tuition ðanywhere between €10,000 and over €25,000 per yearÞ .
454 Ors et al .
gram that rejects a candidate on the basis of high school grades will not typically revisit its decision even if the student in question eventually gradu- ates at the baccalauréat with honors ðmore information on the equivalence of French high school honors is provided belowÞ.17 This suggests another reason why the baccalauréat can be seen as a noncompetitive exam for stu- dents admitted to the prep schools : superior performance during the high school finishing exam has no bearing on the prep school ’ s admission deci- sion , which the student already knows by the time of the baccalauréat exam .
Moreover , prep schools are highly competitive environments , typically post- ing the rankings of their students within a class after exams and eventually asking poorly performing ones to leave ðe.g. , Le Monde 2012Þ .
Third , while students graduating from high school are guaranteed a spot in one of the three universities in the académie of their high school , irrespective of their academic performance as long as they obtain their high school diploma , they have to take different competitive entrance exams for different grandes écoles .
The fact that few schools pool their entrance ex- ams limits the number of grandes écoles a student can apply to.18 Candi- dates have to optimize their time and efforts over a large number of en- trance exams , a fact that contributes to the selectiveness of the grande école system .
Fourth , upon graduation , job market prospects are drastically different for grande école and university graduates .
The nonselectivity of the uni- versity admission process combined with ðiÞ the increasing proportion of 18-year-olds in the general population obtaining a baccalauréat over the decades and ðiiÞ a mismatch between the labor market demand and the number of students graduating in various fields implies that French univer- sities often confer diplomas with little value in the job market ðwith few notable exceptions , such as medicineÞ .
For example , in 2006 , French univer- sities had approximately 65,000 psychology students ðone-fourth of the Eu- ropean students in the fieldÞ and roughly 45,000 “ sports science ” students ðEconomist 2006Þ.19 In contrast , grandes écoles provide engineering or busi- ness education with much better employment opportunities .
In fact , the sal- ary gap between HEC and other business school graduates that we noted in the introduction is even larger with respect to university graduates .
During the last year of their studies , HEC students typically get multiple job offers 17 High school students can typically apply to up to three universities and up to 12 prep schools before taking their baccalauréat exam .
Many prep schools short- list candidates and may accept students after the baccalauréat exam if the students offered admission choose to attend another prep school and free up space .
18 HEC pools its written exams with ESCP , traditionally the third-best-ranked business grande école in France , even though each school conducts its own set of oral exams .
Both schools are affiliated with the CCIP .
19 Such large numbers can be explained , in part , by the fact that France ’ s 81 uni- versities are public , requiring fees of only less than a few hundred euros per year .
In Performance Gender Gap 455 before they obtain their diplomas , with a nonnegligible number of offers being for positions in other countries , such as the United Kingdom .
A diploma from a top-ranked grande école also gives access to a large and es- tablished alumni network within and outside of France .
As such , getting admission into a grande école drastically changes career prospects for the candidates , all the more so if the candidate is admitted to the best school in its field .
This context explains the high level of pressure and competition that is built into the entrance exam of a top-ranked grande école such as HEC .
B. HEC Admission Process The HEC MSc in Management is the direct descendant of the program created 110 years ago .
Since 1920 , admission takes place through a compet- itive exam.Historically an all-male establishment , in 1973 the school started to admit women , whose proportion rose from approximately 30 % in 1985 to just below 50 % in 2007 .
The competitive entrance exam is organized by la Direction des Admissions et Concours ðthe Admissions and Entrance ExamAdministrationCenter ½AEEACÞ , which is not directly affiliatedwith HEC , and proceeds in two steps .
First , all applicants ðon average 3,400 per year during the period 2005–7Þ , whomwewill refer to as candidates , have to take seven written exams .
In a second stage , the highest-ranked 700 or so , whom we will refer to as admissibles , will be allowed to take a series of oral exams .
On the basis of the weighted sum of all grades obtained at the written and the oral exam stages , HECwill admit the highest-ranked 380 , whomwe will refer to as the admitted .
The school does not set any quotas per gender , educational background , nationality , or socioeconomic class .
Admission is solely based on the final ranking of the candidate among all other candidates using the weighted sum of written and oral exam scores .
The weights used in this evaluation differ depending on the educational background of the candidate .
There are four different educational backgrounds or tracks : sci- ence ðapproximately 56 % of the candidate poolÞ , economics ð30 % Þ , litera- ture ð13 % Þ , and technology ð1 % Þ.20 It should be noted that the rankings are done across the board for these four tracks ði.e. , a literature candidate who has a better total weighted sum would be placed higher than a science can- didate with a lower scoreÞ .
During the selection process , the written exams are based on essay-type questions or involve solving mathematical prob- lems but do not includemultiple-choice questions .
The oral exams typically contrast , even though many of the best engineering grandes écoles are public and tuition free , business grandes écoles are attached to regional chambers of commerce and typically require tuition , which may be up to €12,000 per year ðas in the case of HECÞ .
That said , it is easy for students admitted to HEC to obtain bank loans to finance their studies , and the school provides need-based scholarships .
20 The last group has a baccalauréat from a technological high school .
France has three types of high schools and baccalauréats , a degree obtained by roughly two-thirdsof18-year-olds inthecountry : ðiÞgeneralistðintroducedin1808Þ , ðiiÞ tech- 456 Ors et al .
involve 15–30 minutes of testing on a question or problem that is drawn randomly from a question bank .
Our study focuses on the largest group of candidates : those with a sci- ence major in high school , who have to specialize in a submajor during the last year of high school in mathematics , physics and chemistry , or life and earth sciences ði.e. , biology and geologyÞ.We rely on the sample of students with the same science background in order to reduce the possibility that the gender gap we observe is due to differences in backgrounds or self- selection of females into nonscience fields.21 This group typically attends science-oriented prep schools that prepare students for entrance exams of grandes écoles in management.22 Even though attending a prep school is not a prerequisite for taking the grande école entrance exam , 93.96 % of the candidates in our sample attend these institutions .
In the first stage of the entrance exam , all candidates , irrespective of their track , are evaluated on their expression skills in French as well as two for- eign languages ðone of which is typically EnglishÞ .
Candidates also sit for track-specific exams depending on their educational background .
The can- didates with a science background take two written exams in mathematics , one in history and geography , and one in general culture .
Table 1 provides the complete list of different written and oral exams for the science track .
For each exam , students receive amark , ranging between zero and20 , in line with the French primary and secondary education grading scheme.23 The weights indicated in table 1 are used in the calculation of the weighted sum 22 Science-oriented prep schools follow different curricula dependent on whether they prepare students for management or engineering grandes écoles .
23 While there is no official correspondence between the French grading system out of 20 and the American system based on letter grades , the Fulbright Commission in France suggests the following equivalence scheme ðfor eleventh and twelfth gradesÞ : 18–20A1 , 16–17A , 13–15A2 , 12B1 , 11 B , 10B2 , 9C1 , 8 C , 7C2 , 6D1 , 5D , 4 D2 , and 3 and below F ðhttp : //www.fulbright-france.org/docs/2010170242 _Balzactoolkitfrench.pdf , 12Þ .
A French student needs an average of 10/20 to val- idate an academic year or the baccalauréat .
21 We would have had a much more heterogeneous sample if we had analyzed the full sample of all candidates : to make the point , among high school students who graduated in 2005 with a generalist baccalauréat , 46.6 % of science majors were females , whereas the same proportion was 63.5 % for economics and social science majors and 81.6 % for literature majors in high school .
nological ðintroduced in 1964Þ , and ðiiiÞ vocational ðintroduced in 1985Þ .
The gen- eralist baccalauréat , which 99 % of HEC candidates possess , is the most sought- after degree , obtained by 54 % of French high school seniors .
Middle school stu- dents who are unable to perform adequately in the generalist institutions are directed toward technological or vocational high schools .
Technological high schools educate students in the fields of engineering and management with a view toward training technicians and clerical staff ðsuch as accountantsÞ who will eventually pursue a shorter higher education program without necessarily attending a university or a grande école .
Vocational high school students train to become artisans or skilled workers in various industries .
Performance Gender Gap 457 of grades , which the AEEAC uses to rank the candidates .
We calculate an equivalent weighted-average score ðout of 20Þ that we use as the perfor- mancemetric .
Even thoughwe limit ourselves to science track students , the diversity of subjects on which these candidates are evaluated still allows us to test whether any performance difference that we observe may be driven by differences in mathematics affinity across genders .
This is important because for the science track candidates , mathematics accounts for 36.67 % of written exam weights and 25 % of oral exam weights .
In fact , the structure of the entrance examination resembles an iterated elimination tournament in which ð1Þ less than 25 % of the approximately 3,400 candi- dates per year become admissibles and ð2Þ approximately 55 % of the ad- missibles ðwhich corresponds to 11 % of candidatesÞ are eventually ad- mitted to the school .
Once admitted to HEC , students spend 3 years on campus and take an interim year to do a series of internships .
Their first year ends the bachelor cycle initiated in prep school , whereas their last 2 years correspond to the MSc in Management degree.24 Except for a few elective courses , the bulk of the first year consists of the same core courses for all the admitted , which allows us to examine whether the differences observed during the entrance exam persist in the first year of HEC studies .
C. The Baccalauréat Exam The baccalauréat exam , first introduced in 1808 by Napoléon , is the product of a highly centralized system run by the French Ministry of Na- 24 The last year is dedicated to a 1-year specialization in one area of management ðaccounting , finance , strategy , marketing , international business , etc.Þ .
It should be noted that no diploma or certificate is conferred at the end of the first year of HEC when the bachelor cycle is completed .
Table 1 Structure of the HEC Admission Exam Written Exam ðFirst StageÞ Oral Exam ðSecond StageÞ Duration Coefficient Duration Coefficient Common exams : French 3 hours 3 1st foreign language 4 hours 4 15 minutes 4 2nd foreign language 3 hours 2 15 minutes 3 General culture 20 minutes 6 Debate 40 minutes 6 Exams specific to the science track : General culture 4 hours 4 Mathematics 1 4 hours 6 30 minutes 9 Mathematics 2 4 hours 5 History and geography 4 hours 6 20 minutes 8 Total 30 36 458 Ors et al .
tional Education .
It differs in many aspects from the US high school di- ploma , which is the product of a decentralized system .
The baccalauréat degree is obtained following a series of national written tests ðand oral tests for foreign languagesÞ typically spread over 5 days .
The composition of the exams in terms of subject matters ðFrench literature , mathematics , physics , chemistry , life sciences ½biology and geology , philosophy , and foreign lan- guagesÞ and the different weights given to these fields vary according to the major chosen at the end of seconde ðthe equivalent of tenth grade in the United StatesÞ and the submajor chosen at the end of première ðthe elev- enth gradeÞ .
The interaction of gender and acquaintance can not affect the results we observe for the baccalauréat .
Grading of this exam is anonymous : teach- ers coming from other and typically nonneighborhood high schools grade blinded-exam papers.25 The evaluation of the exam copies is based on the answer key and grading scheme provided by the Ministry of National Ed- ucation .
There is no “ curve ” involved either for individual topics or for the baccalauréat as a whole : only students who obtain a weighted average of 10 out 20 obtain their diploma .
The baccalauréat exam is inherently different from the HEC entrance exam for two reasons .
First , in contrast to the HEC admission process , which is clearly a contest for a fixed number of spots , the baccalauréat is in essence a pass-or-fail type of exam with three levels of graduation honors beyond a simple “ pass. ” The 300,000–325,000 high school students who are about to take the general baccalauréat exam each year know that any studentwhomanages to obtain aweighted-average baccalauréat score ðwith weights that are predetermined for each of the submajorsÞ of 10 out of 20 will necessarily obtain his or her diploma .
In other words , students taking the baccalauréat do not directly compete against each other : the success of a candidate does not imply the failure of another one .
Moreover , instead of a curve , a standardized grading scheme is applied to the same set of ques- tions for all the high school seniors in a given track .
In that sense the bac- calauréat provides a fixed standard for a given year .
Finally , as already men- tioned , for high school students who have been admitted to a prep school ð93.96 % of candidates in our sampleÞ , since admission is known before the baccalauréat theyneedonly apass in this exam.Conversely , when they sit for the HEC entrance exam , candidates know that there will be only 380 ad- mitted students , irrespective of the number of candidates .
Second , the success rates at the two exams are clearly of very different magnitudes .
The success rates in the 2003 , 2004 , and 2005 general bacca- lauréat ðwhich correspond to the 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 candidate cohorts in our sample , respectivelyÞ were 83.7 % , 82.7 % , and 84.3 % , respectively , 25 Moreover , testing centers typically seat students from different high schools in alphabetical order .
Performance Gender Gap 459 for all majors combined and 84.8 % , 83.0 % , and 84.8 % , respectively , for the science majors .
As noted earlier , the proportion of students success- fully validating their first year at HEC is approximately 99 % .
These rates are very different from the 11 % success rate at the HEC entrance exam .
In our opinion , these differences render the entrance exam a very compet- itive and stressful setting , whereas the baccalauréat is in fact a noncompet- itive exam that is relatively less stressful .
One could argue that the possibility for prep school students to be able to transfer to a university degree program without losing a year ðprovided that the prep school year is successfully completedÞ reduces the pressures involved in the HEC entrance exam .
However , it should also be noted that the large salary gaps noted earlier between HEC and other business schools , let alone universities , create important economic incentives that increase the stakes for the HEC entrance exam .
While we can not observe baccalauréat exam grades , our data set in- cludes honors obtained during the high school finishing exam .
Beyond providing a useful control for the ability of the candidate in the multivar- iate analysis of the HEC entrance exam and during the first-year courses at HEC , we use the baccalauréat performance to test whether , for the same cohort of students , the gender gap existed in a noncompetitive , ðrel- ativelyÞ less stressful exam 2 years prior to the competitive entrance exam ðat least for our set of candidates , who are among the best high school students in their yearÞ .
D. First-Year Core Courses at HEC We also look at the performance of students admitted in 2005 and 2006 in their core courses in the first year of HEC when they take 11 compul- sory classes that account for 44 ð73.33 % Þ of the 60 ECTS credits needed for the academic year:26 accounting , economics , finance , marketing , law , theory of organizations , supply chain , statistics , quantitative methods , mod- eling with Excel , and English as a first foreign language .
The first seven of these courses are worth 5 ECTS credits , statistics and quantitative meth- ods 2.5 ECTS credits , and the last two courses 2 ECTS credits .
There are also a number of elective courses worth 16 ECTS points .
Since students dif- fer in their elective course choices , we do not include the nonmandatory courses in our analysis in order to be able to have a common performance metric .
In contrast to the entrance exam or the baccalauréat , exam copies are not anonymously graded during the first-year courses at HEC .
One could 26 The 2007 cohort can not be added to this analysis since the first-year curric- ulum was subject to a major reform that came into effect in September 2007 : some of the first-year courses were moved to the second year , whereas others were given 460 Ors et al .
argue that an interaction between gender and personal acquaintance could theoretically play a role in our empirical analysis of the first-year perfor- mance .
However , we do not believe that this is a serious concern for two reasons .
First , when performance is measured by the first-year ðcore courseÞ GPA , we note that ðiÞ there are 78 professors teaching the 11 core courses , ðiiÞ no professor teaches all the sections of a given class in a given year , and ðiiiÞ the GPA is a weighted average of 11 courses that would largely dilute any potential bias .
Second , when using the individual letter grades as the performance metric , we include year , course , and professor indicator variables in our specifications to account for differences in aver- age grades across years , courses , and professors .
IV .
Data and Descriptive Statistics The data set used in the analysis covers 5,743 students who applied to the HEC MSc in Management program in 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 to take the science track of the admission exam .
As part of the application process the candidates have to provide to theAEEACofficial documents that attest to their identity , gender , age , nationality , and the name of the prep school they attended .
Since better-ranked prep schools are more selective and since the training received by students for 2 years may influence their per- formance in the entrance exam , we use prep school indicator variables ði.e. , fixed effectsÞ to control for the quality of the scientific prep schools or , alternatively , the rankings of prep schools that are published in the French press .
The candidates also have to provide a copy of their baccalauréat di- ploma that explicitly states the high school major , submajor , as well as any honors ðbut not the average gradeÞ the student may have received during the high school graduation exam .
The proprietary data set made available to us by AEEAC contains all the entrance exam marks ðgiven out of 20Þ at all the written exams for all the candidates , all the marks at the oral exams for all the admissibles , and an indicator variable for the admitted .
During the written ðoralÞ exam stage , the examiners do not have access to the can- didates ’ baccalauréat ðand writtenÞ exam grades or honors .
Table 2 provides descriptive statistics at the different stages of the ad- mission process for the science track candidates , admissibles , and admit- ted .
In a first series of tests , we examine the evolution of the fraction of females through the stages of the admission exam using two-tailed bino- mial tests for the equality of the observed ði.e. , estimatedÞ proportions ðfor which , see , e.g. , Siegel and Castellan ½1988 , 38–44Þ .
First , we test the null hypothesis ðH10Þ that the observed proportion of females is equal to 50 % .
a smaller number of credit hours ðhence fewer ECTS creditsÞ .
As a result , we can not make meaningful comparisons of first-year performance for 2005 and 2006 cohorts with that of 2007 .
Performance Gender Gap 461 T ab le 2 D es cr ip ti ve St at is ti cs fo r G en de r C om po si ti on s an d C on tr ol V ar ia bl es C an d id at es ðW ri tt en E xa m Sa m p le Þ A d m is si b le s ðO ra l E xa m Sa m p le Þ A d m it te d M al e F em al e z- St at is ti c M al e F em al e z- St at is ti c M al e F em al e z- St at is ti c G en d er co m p o si ti o n : P rðX Þ .5 08 4 .4 91 6 .5 36 8 .4 63 2 .5 40 8 .4 59 2 ð2 ,9 20 Þ ð2 ,8 23 Þ ð7 37 Þ ð6 36 Þ ð3 98 Þ ð3 38 Þ H 1 0 : P rðF iÞ 2 .5 00 0 5 0 2 1 .
28 00 2 2 .
72 58 ** * 2 2 .
21 16 ** ½.2 00 6 ½.0 06 4 ½.0 27 0 H 2 0 : P rðF iÞ 2 P rðM iÞ 5 0 2 1 .
81 02 * 2 3 .
85 48 ** * 2 3 .
12 77 ** * ½.0 70 3 ½.0 00 1 ½.0 01 8 H 3 0 : P rðF ca n d id at es Þ2 P rðF ad m is si b le sÞ 5 0 1 .
88 72 * ½.0 59 1 H 4 0 : P rðF ad m is si b le sÞ 2 P rðF ad m it te d Þ5 0 .1 74 8 ½.8 61 3 H 5 0 : P rðF ad m it te d Þ2 P rðF ca n d id at es Þ5 0 2 1 .
65 13 * ½.0 98 7 B ac ca la u ré at h o n o rs ð/4 Þ : Sc ie n ce m aj o rs 2 .
69 2 .
98 f2 12 .7 2g ** * 3 .
13 3 .
43 f2 7 .
88 g* ** 3 .
29 3 .
58 f2 6 .
15 g* ** ð2 ,9 11 Þ ð2 ,8 19 Þ ½.0 00 0 ð7 35 Þ ð6 35 Þ ½.0 00 0 ð3 96 Þ ð3 38 Þ ½.0 00 M at h em at ic s su b m aj o rs 2 .
72 2 .
99 f2 10 .6 2g ** * 3 .
14 3 .
41 f2 6 .
49 g* ** 3 .
28 3 .
58 f2 5 .
57 g* ** ð2 ,0 70 Þ ð1 ,9 58 Þ ½.0 00 0 ð5 75 Þ ð4 97 Þ ½.0 00 0 ð3 21 Þ ð2 66 Þ ½.0 00 0 P h y si cs an d ch em is tr y su b m aj o rs 2 .
62 2 .
92 f2 5 .
21 g* ** 3 .
09 3 .
49 f2 3 .
32 g* ** 3 .
39 3 .
51 f2 .7 1g ð4 27 Þ ð4 47 Þ ½.0 00 0 ð7 7Þ ð5 9Þ ½.0 01 2 ð2 8Þ ð3 5Þ ½.4 79 9 L if e sc ie n ce s su b m aj o rs 2 .
67 2 .
96 f2 4 .
60 g* ** 3 .
11 3 .
44 f2 2 .
69 g* ** 3 .
28 3 .
65 f2 2 .
40 g* * ð3 51 Þ ð3 68 Þ ½.0 00 0 ð7 2Þ ð6 8Þ ½.0 08 1 ð4 0Þ ð3 1Þ ½.0 19 3 Sc ie n ce p re p sc h o o l ra n k 27 .6 2 24 .7 5 f4 .9 9g ** * 14 .2 1 12 .9 3 f1 .8 0g * 11 .5 3 10 .3 6 f1 .4 1g ð2 ,7 46 Þ ð2 ,6 56 Þ ½.0 00 0 ð7 18 Þ ð6 16 Þ ½.0 72 2 ð3 91 Þ ð3 27 Þ ½.1 58 4 N o n -F re n ch n at io n al s ð % Þ 5 .
92 9 .
03 f2 4 .
48 g* ** 4 .
75 8 .
81 f2 2 .
96 g* ** 5 .
53 9 .
47 f2 2 .
01 g* * ð2 ,9 20 Þ ð2 ,8 23 Þ ½.0 00 0 ð7 37 Þ ð6 36 Þ ½.0 03 2 ð3 98 Þ ð3 38 Þ ½.0 45 3 N O T E .— U n d er ge n d er co m p o si ti o n , fi ve h y p o th es es ar e te st ed u si n g tw o -t ai le d te st s fo r w h ic h th e z- st at is ti cs ar e p ro vi d ed .
F ir st , w e te st fo r th e eq u al it y o f th e es ti m at ed p ro p o rt io n s o f fe m al es ðP rðF ÞÞ to .5 00 0 fo r th e sa m p le o f ca n d id at es , ad m is si b le s , an d ad m it te d ði .
e. , H 1 0 : P rðF iÞ 5 .5 00 0 , w h er e i d en o te s th e sa m p le o f ca n d id at es , a d m is si b le s , o r ad m it te d Þ .
Se co n d , w e te st fo r th e eq u al it y o f th e es ti m at ed p ro p o rt io n s o f fe m al es an d m al es in a gi ve n sa m p le ði .
e. , H 2 0 : P rðF iÞ 2 P rðM iÞ 5 0 , w h er e i d en o te s th e sa m p le o f ca n d id at es , a d m is si b le s , o r ad m it te d Þ. T h ir d , w e te st fo r th e eq u al it y o f th e es ti m at ed p ro p o rt io n s o f fe m al es fo r th e ca n d id at es w it h th at fo r th e ad m is si b le s ði .
e. , H 3 0 : P rðF ca n d id at es Þ 2 P rðF ad m is si b le sÞ 5 0Þ .
F o u rt h , w e te st fo r th e eq u al it y o f th e es ti m at ed p ro p o rt io n s o f fe m al es fo r th e ad m is si b le s w it h th at fo r th e ad m it te d ði .
e. , H 4 0 : P rðF ad m is si b le sÞ 2 P rðF ad m it te d Þ5 0Þ .F if th , w e te st fo r th e eq u al it y o f th e es ti m at ed p ro p o rt io n s o f fe m al es fo r th e ad m it te d w it h th at fo r th e ca n d id at es ði .
e. , H 5 0 : P rðF ad m it te d Þ2 P rðF ca n d id at es Þ5 0Þ .
In th e re m ai n d er o f th e ta b le th e eq u al it y o f th e m ea n s fo r th e va ri ab le s b ac ca la u ré at h o n o rs , s ci en ce p re p sc h o o l ra n k , a n d n o n -F re n ch n at io n al s is te st ed u si n g a tw o -t ai le d t- te st th at al lo w s fo r u n eq u al va ri an ce s ðt- st at is ti cs ar e p ro vi d ed in b ra ce sÞ .
T es t- st at is ti c p- va lu es ar e p ro vi d ed in b ra ck et s an d sa m p le si ze s in p ar en th es es .
* p < .1 0 .
** p < .0 5 .
** * p < .0 1 .
We can not reject H10 for the candidates , of which 49.16 % are female .
27 In contrast , we reject H10 for the admissibles ð46.32 % Þ and the admitted ð45.92 % Þ at the 1 % and 5 % levels , respectively .
Second , we test the null hypothesis ðH20Þ that the fractions of males and females are equal at a given stage of the admission exam .
There are slightly fewer female candidates ð49.16Þ than male ones ð50.84Þ , the difference being statistically significant at the 10 level .
This gender gap increases among the admissibles , where the females constitute 46.32 of the candidates retained for the oral exam com- pared to 53.68 for males , a difference that is statistically significant at the 1 % level .
This discrepancy in the gender composition persists among the admitted , of which 45.92 % are female , whereas males constitute 54.08 % , with H20 being rejected at the 1 % level .
Third , we test the null hypothesis ðH30Þ that the observed fraction of females among the candidates ð49.16 % Þ is equal to that among the admissibles ð46.32 % Þ : H30 is rejected at the 10 % level .
Fourth , we can not reject the null ðH40Þ that there is no difference in the estimated proportions of females among the admissibles ð46.32 % Þ versus the admitted ð45.92 % Þ .
Finally , we observe that the null hypothesis ðH50Þ of the equality of the observed fraction of females between the admitted ð45.92 % Þ and the candidates ð49.16 % Þ is rejected at the 10 % level , in line with the rejection of H30 and the nonrejection of H 4 0 .
These binomial tests of the equality of estimated proportions suggest that the proportion of fe- males decreases following the written stage and stays roughly constant dur- ing the oral stage .
In table 2 , in a second series of tests , we examine the gender differences in honors obtained at the baccalauréat exam for the candidates , the admis- sibles , and the admitted.28 There are three types of honors in the baccalau- réat , with grades between 10 and 12 ðout of 20Þ corresponding to passable ði.e. , a simple pass with no distinctionsÞ , grades between 12 and 14 to assez bien ðthe equivalent of cum laudeÞ , grades between 14 and 16 to bien ðthe equivalent of magna cum laudeÞ , and grades above 16 to très bien ðthe equivalent of summa cum laudeÞ .
We code the baccalauréat honors variable as 1 , 2 , 3 , or 4 when the baccalauréat has been successfully obtained with a simple pass or with honors that are the equivalent of cum laude , magna cum laude , or summa cum laude , respectively .
On average , women perform much better than men at the baccalauréat exam .
Female candidates ’ bacca- 27 The proportion of science track female candidates in our sample is higher than that observed in the comparable population of students in the final year of high school : in the 2003 ð2004 , 2005Þ cohorts of high school science majors that corre- spond to the cohorts of candidates in our sample , of the 159,673 ð156,814 , 161,396Þ students who sat for the science track baccalauréat exam , 44.6 % ð44.7 % , 45.2 % Þ were female .
Of the 135,374 ð130,225 , 136,877Þ students who succeeded and ob- tained a science major baccalauréat diploma in 2003 ð2004 , 2005Þ , 46.2 % ð46.3 % , 46.6 % Þ were female ðhttp : //www.education.gouv.fr/statevalÞ .
28 Unfortunately , we do not have the candidates ’ average baccalauréat grades , which would have permitted more precise tests .
Performance Gender Gap 463 lauréat honors average is 2.98 out of 4 , whereas the men ’ s average is 2.69 , and the 0.29 difference between the two groups is statistically significant at the 1 % level in a two-tailed t-test .
Moreover , the same observation is made when examining the baccalauréat performance differences for the admissi- bles and the admitted .
Among the admissibles , females ’ average baccalauréat honors of 3.43 is 0.30 points higher than that of males , whereas among the admitted , the females ’ average baccalauréat honors of 3.58 is 0.30 points higher than that of males .
In both cases , the difference is statistically signifi- cant at the 1 % level in two-tailed t-tests .
In the next section in table 2 we check whether the results for the bac- calauréat honors still hold ifwe consider separately the different submajors ðmathematics , physics and chemistry , or life sciencesÞ that science majors can specialize in as seniors in high school .
We observe that for different science submajors , females ’ baccalauréathonors is always statistically higher than that of males for candidates , admissibles , and admitted categories ðsee under baccalauréat honors in table 2Þ .
The only exception is the group of admitted physics and chemistry submajors , where the females ’ higher hon- ors average ð3.51/4.00Þ is not statistically different from that of males ð3.39/ 4.00Þ.29 Overall , these results indicate that female candidates , admissibles , and admitted do significantly better in the French high school finishing exam than their respective male counterparts .
We reexamine this discrep- ancy in a multivariate setting below in Section V.B .
We also compare the average baccalauréat honors for candidates for the HEC entrance exam with the one that we calculated for the population of science majors taking the high school finishing exam 2 years prior to our sample cohort-years .
Unsurprisingly , HEC candidates are much more suc- cessful than the general population of students taking the regular baccalau- réat exam ði.e. , excluding students taking technology or vocational bacca- lauréat examsÞ .
For 2003 , 2004 , and 2005 , the years in which the 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 cohorts in our sample took the scientific versions of the high school finishing exam , the females ’ average baccalauréat honor was 1.75 out of 4 ðcompared to 2.98 in our sampleÞ , whereas that of males was 1.64 ðcompared to 2.69 in our sampleÞ .
It should be noted that even the candidates who are eliminated after the first-round ðwrittenÞ exams have much higher bacca- lauréat performance : for this group the baccalauréat honors average is 2.84 for females and 2.55 for males .
These statistics suggest that the benchmark group in the HEC entrance exam has much higher academic abilities than the general population of students obtaining the baccalauréat.30 29 These tests are also less precise given the lower number of observations in- volved ð63 and 71 , respectivelyÞ .
30 Note that the actual baccalauréat performance gap between the HEC can- didates and the population of science track majors in high school is even larger , since the averages that we report here do not take into account the fact that 15 % of high school seniors fail the high school graduation exam .
464 Ors et al .
In the second to last row in table 2 , we look at prep school rankings and any differences that may exist in this dimension across genders at various stages of the entrance contest .
There are 236 institutions in our initial sam- ple that offered a business grande école prep school program , all types of tracks ðscience , economics , and literatureÞ combined .
Of these , 91 that pro- vided a science track prep school were ranked ðLa Lettre de L ’ Etudiant 2006Þ.31 We coded the ranked prep schools in decreasing order ; that is , the top-ranked institution is coded 1 and the last-ranked is coded 91 .
Out of 5,743 candidates in our data set , 5,396 ð93.96 % Þ had attended one of these 91 ranked institutions .
The ranking variable was coded 92 for the 219 can- didates attending one of the 27 nonranked science track prep schools and as 93 for the 128 candidates for whom no prep school name is provided .
The average prep school ranking for the male candidates is 27.62 com- pared to 24.75 for females , the difference being statistically significant at the 1 % level in a two-tailed t-statistic .
In other words , female candidates attend better-ranked prep schools than males , on average .
If anything , this almost three-position higher rank potentially gives an advantage to females given the fact that candidates coming from a top 20 prep school are more successful in enteringHEC : 49.26 % of the candidates attended a top 20 prep school , compared to 78.59 % of the admissibles and 86.28 % of the admitted .
In table 2 , the higher average prep school ranking of females persists among admissibles ð12.93 for females vs. 14.21 for malesÞ and the admitted ð10.36 for females vs. 11.53 for malesÞ , but the observed difference is only mar- ginally statistically significant for the admissibles ðat the 10 % levelÞ but not statistically significant for the admitted .
In the last row of table 2 , we also examine the proportion of non-French among the candidate pool since the entrance exams , with the exception of foreign languages , are conducted in French .
Non-French make up 7.45 % of the candidates , compared to 7.34 % of the admitted ðnot reported in ta- ble 2Þ .
The observed 0.11 % difference is not statistically different from zero .
The non-French male-to-female ratio remains similar at different stages of the entrance exam.Thepercentageof femalenon-Frenchcandidates is 9.03 % versus 5.92 % for males ðthe difference is statistically significant at the 1 % level in a two-tailed t-testÞ , whereas among the admitted the percentage of non-French females is 9.47 % versus 5.53 % for the males ðthe difference is statistically significant at the 5 % levelÞ .
Even though being non-French does not appear to affect the proportion of females or the chances of becoming admitted , we nevertheless account for it in ourmultivariate analysis in order to control for the possibility that differences in written and oral expression skills between native ðmother tongueÞ and nonnative French speakers may have an effect on exam performance .
31 Different prep school rankings are published in various French newspapers and magazines .
We use the most comprehensive ranking list .
Performance Gender Gap 465 Restricting ourselves to science majors in high school does not neces- sarily guarantee homogeneity in gender composition .
Science submajors may have different gender compositions if , for example , males are more likely to choose mathematics or physics and chemistry submajors while females are more likely to choose life sciences ðbiology and geologyÞ .
In table 3 , we document the gender composition of the three science sub- specialties in the baccalauréat that form 98.10 % of our sample : mathe- matics , physics and chemistry , and life sciences ðbiology and geologyÞ submajors , which represent 70.30 % , 15.25 % , and 12.55 % of our sample , respectively .
First , we use a two-tailed binomial test for the equality of the observed ði.e. , estimatedÞ proportions to check whether there are statistically sig- nificant differences in the gender composition of submajors and present the results in brackets in column 3 of table 3 .
The proportion of male candidates in the mathematics submajor ð51.39 % Þ is higher than that of females ð48.61 % Þ , a difference that is statistically significant at the 5 % Table 3 Gender Composition of Candidates with a Science Baccalauréat by Submajor in High School High School Science Major by Submajor Number of Males ð1Þ Number of Females ð2Þ H0 : PrðMaleÞ 2 PrðFemaleÞ 5 0 ð3Þ Submajor Total ð4Þ Mathematics 2,070 1,958 4,028 ð71.11Þ ð69.46Þ ð1.3684Þ ð70.30Þ ½51.39 ½48.61 ½2.4957** Physics and chemistry 427 447 874 ð14.67Þ ð15.86Þ ð21.2507Þ ð15.25Þ ½48.86 ½51.14 ½2.9567 Life sciences ðbiology and geologyÞ 351 368 719 ð12.06Þ ð13.05Þ ð21.1385Þ ð12.55Þ ½48.82 ½51.12 ½2.8966 Engineering and agronomy 47 16 63 ð1.61Þ ð.57Þ ð3.7996Þ*** ð1.12Þ ½74.60 ½25.40 ½5.5234*** Other majors in science track in admission exam 16 30 46 ð.55Þ ð1.06Þ ð22.1821Þ** ð.78Þ ½34.78 ½65.22 ½22.9192*** Total 2,911 2,819 5,730 ð100.00Þ ð100.00Þ ð100.00Þ NOTE.—This table provides information on the gender composition for the 5,730 candidates with a science background that form the main sample by submajors that they have chosen in high school .
In cols .
1 , 2 , and 4 , numbers in parentheses are percentages with respect to the total at the bottom of each column , whereas the numbers in brackets are percentages with respect to the submajor total on the left of each row ; in col. 3 , numbers in parentheses and brackets are the corresponding two-tailed binomial test statistics for the null hypothesis that col. 1 minus col. 2 difference equals zero .
* p < .10 .
** p < .05 .
*** p < .01 .
466 Ors et al .
level .
While the proportion of female candidates is higher for physics and chemistry and life sciences submajors , the observed differences for the latter two groups are not statistically significant .
Second , always using a two-tailed binomial test , we check for the equality of the observed pro- portions of males and females in different submajors as a percentage of the total number of males and females in the overall sample , respectively .
The results are reported within parentheses in table 3 .
We find that the ratio of males with a submajor in mathematics to the total number of males ð71.11 % Þ is slightly higher than that of females ð69.46 % Þ , a differ- ence that is not statistically significant .
We also find that the proportion of males with a submajor in physics and chemistry ðlife sciencesÞwith respect to the total number of males , which is 14.67 % ð12.06 % Þ , is lower than that of females , which is 15.86 % ð13.05 % Þ .
These differences are not statisti- cally significant either .
We also conduct these two sets of proportional- ity tests for the engineering and other nonspecified submajors and find statistically significant differences .
However , these two subsamples form less than 2 % of our sample and hence are unlikely to have a major in- fluence on our results .
Finally , we conduct a Kolmogorov-Smirnov ðKSÞ equality-of-distributions test after coding a mathematics submajor as 1 , physics and chemistry as 2 , life and earth sciences as 3 , and so forth ðfor the KS test , see , e.g. , Siegel and Castellan ½1988 , 144–51Þ .
We obtain a KS test statistic of 0.0165 with a p-value of .829 : when the whole distribution is taken into account , the KS test does not reject the null hypothesis that the science submajors ’ frequency distributions for males and females are equal , a result that is not surprising given the previous set of propor- tion test results .
Despite the test results in table 3 , we nevertheless control for potential differences in the gender composition of the different submajors ðiÞ by including submajor indicator variables in our multivariate regressions and ðiiÞ by reestimating our multivariate specifications for the different sub- majors ðthese last regressions are reported in the online appendixÞ .
Next , we focus on the differences in entrance exam performance between males and females using univariate tests and multivariate regressions .
V. Gender Differences in Performance A. Univariate Analysis To test whether there are any differences in performance between gen- ders , we start by conducting a series of parametric and nonparametric univariate tests .
First , we examine the overall ðweighted-averageÞ written and oral examgrades .
Second , for the same sample , we test for differences in performance during the baccalauréat and first year of HEC .
Third , we explore if the differences that we observe may be driven by potential dif- ferences in affinity toward mathematics across genders by examining math- ematics and nonmathematics grades .
Performance Gender Gap 467 In table 4 , we present two-tailed test results for the equality of the me- dians , means , variances , and distributions as well as the frequency distribu- tions for the HEC weighted-average entrance exam grades .
Tests of central tendencies for thewritten and oral exams ðpanels A andBof table 4Þ provide weak evidence that males may be outperforming females .
The median of the written ðoralÞ exam grades for males is 10.69 ð10.69Þ compared to 10.52 ð10.54Þ for females .
The null hypothesis of the equality of themedians across genders is rejected in a nonparametric test for the equality of the medians for the written exam but can not be rejected for the oral exam.32 The mean written ðoralÞ exam score for males is 10.66 ð10.70Þ compared to 10.58 ð10.56Þ for females ; the null hypotheses of the equality of the means across genders can not be rejected in two-sided t-tests for either type of exam.33 Since the entrance exam selects admissibles and admitted using ranking- based cutoffs in the upper tails of the written and oral exams , respectively , we focus our attention on the frequency distributions of the exam grades .
When we use a nonparametric KS test , the equality of the frequency dis- tributions is rejected for the written exams score at the 10 % level but not rejected for the oral exams .
Eyeballing different percentiles of the data re- ported in panels A and B of table 4 , we observe that , compared to the fre- quency distributions of grades for the women , the men ’ s frequency dis- tributions have fatter right tails in the written and oral exams starting with the medians of these distributions ðsee further below in this section for a formal statistical test of stochastic dominanceÞ .
These findings suggest that any acceptance rule that sets a threshold above the median would lead to a higher percentage of men among the admissibles and the admitted .
These observed differences in performance across genders in the uni- variate setting may be due to potential differences in mathematics affin- ity across genders ðfor a discussion , see Niederle and Vesterlund ½2010Þ .
To check for this possibility , we repeat the tests described above for the math- ematics and nonmathematics parts of the written and oral exams separately ðusing the weights of table 1 to calculate weighted averagesÞ .
Results are presented in panels C and D of table 4 .
For the written mathematics exams , we observe a higher median and mean for males and fatter tails that lead to statistically significant differences in frequency dis- tribution and variance tests ðall test results are statistically significant at the 1 % levelÞ ; for the written nonmathematics exams , we reject the equal- ity of the distributions at the 10 % level and the equality of the variances at the 1 % level , but we can not reject the equality of the means or medi- ans .
For the oral exams , the two-sided t-test for the null hypothesis of the 32 See Siegel and Castellan ð1988 , 124–28Þ for a description of this test .
33 The Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test ðe.g. , Siegel and Castellan 1988 , 128–37Þ , the nonparametric equivalent of a t-test , rejects the equality of the means for the written test at the 10 % level .
468 Ors et al .
T ab le 4 D es cr ip ti ve St at is ti cs on H E C E nt ra nc e E xa m Pe rf or m an ce C .
W ri tt en E xa m D .
O ra l E xa m A .
W ri tt en E xa m : O ve ra ll G ra d e B .
O ra l E xa m : O ve ra ll G ra d e M at h E xa m N o n m at h E xa m s M at h E xa m N o n m at h E xa m s M al e F em al e M al e F em al e M al e F em al e M al e F em al e M al e F em al e M al e F em al e O b se rv at io n s 2 , 88 9 2 , 81 0 73 5 63 6 2 , 88 9 2 , 81 0 2 , 88 9 2 , 81 0 73 5 63 6 73 5 63 6 M ed ia n 10 .6 9 10 .5 2 10 .6 9 10 .5 4 10 .7 9 10 .3 0 10 .4 9 10 .5 4 10 .0 0 10 .0 0 11 .4 8 11 .5 2 M ed ia n te st 3 .
79 ** 1 .
50 9 .
53 ** * .3 6 1 .
79 .0 1 M ea n 10 .6 6 10 .5 8 10 .7 0 10 .5 6 10 .9 2 10 .5 8 10 .5 2 10 .5 8 10 .4 7 9 .
93 11 .6 4 11 .6 4 t- te st 1 .
28 1 .
31 3 .
01 ** * 2 1 .
26 2 .
62 ** * .0 5 W M W ra n k -s u m te st 1 .
64 * 1 .
19 3 .
04 ** * 2 .6 6 2 .
27 ** .0 2 K S te st ðD -s ta ti st ic Þ .0 4* .0 6 .0 5* ** .0 3* .0 5 .0 4 1s t p er ce n ti le 4 .
76 5 .
66 6 .
47 6 .
33 1 .
83 2 .
27 5 .
56 6 .
07 3 .
00 1 .
00 6 .
84 6 .
92 5t h p er ce n ti le 6 .
62 6 .
98 7 .
36 7 .
47 3 .
69 4 .
02 6 .
94 7 .
40 4 .
00 4 .
00 7 .
92 8 .
16 10 th p er ce n ti le 7 .
38 7 .
61 8 .
14 8 .
15 5 .
00 5 .
40 7 .
69 8 .
09 6 .
00 5 .
00 8 .
48 8 .
76 25 th p er ce n ti le 8 .
87 8 .
90 9 .
22 9 .
22 7 .
71 7 .
55 9 .
04 9 .
18 8 .
00 7 .
00 9 .
92 10 .0 8 50 th p er ce n ti le 10 .6 9 10 .5 2 10 .6 9 10 .5 4 10 .7 9 10 .3 0 10 .4 9 10 .5 4 10 .0 0 10 .0 0 11 .4 8 11 .5 2 75 th p er ce n ti le 12 .4 2 12 .2 0 12 .0 3 11 .8 6 14 .1 5 13 .5 5 11 .9 9 12 .0 0 13 .0 0 13 .0 0 13 .4 0 13 .3 2 90 th p er ce n ti le 13 .8 8 13 .6 1 13 .3 6 13 .0 8 17 .0 6 16 .2 4 13 .3 3 13 .2 1 16 .0 0 15 .0 0 14 .8 8 14 .5 6 95 th p er ce n ti le 14 .7 6 14 .3 3 14 .0 8 13 .8 6 18 .4 7 17 .7 5 13 .9 3 14 .0 0 17 .0 0 16 .0 0 15 .5 6 15 .3 2 99 th p er ce n ti le 16 .0 3 15 .7 8 15 .4 2 14 .9 4 20 .0 0 19 .6 8 15 .1 2 15 .1 9 19 .0 0 18 .0 0 17 .0 4 16 .6 4 St an d ar d d ev ia ti o n 2 .
49 2 .
28 2 .
03 1 .
91 4 .
41 4 .
09 2 .
13 2 .
00 3 .
90 3 .
76 2 .
37 2 .
22 V ar ia n ce te st 1 .
19 ** * 1 .
13 1 .
16 ** * 1 .
14 ** * 1 .
08 1 .
15 * N O T E .— A ll te st s ar e tw o -t ai le d .
T h e n u ll h y p o th es is fo r th e n o n p ar am et ri c m ed ia n te st is th e eq u al it y o f th e m ed ia n s ac ro ss ge n d er s. T h e n u ll h y p o th es is fo r th e t- te st is th e eq u al it y o f th e m ea n s ac ro ss ge n d er s al lo w in g fo r u n eq u al va ri an ce s. T h e W il co xo n -M an n -W h it n ey ðW M W Þr an k -s u m te st is th e n o n p ar am et ri c eq u iv al en t o f th e t- te st .
T h e n u ll h y p o th es is fo r th e va ri an ce te st is th at th e ra ti o o f va ri an ce s is eq u al to o n e. T h e n u ll h y p o th es is fo r th e n o n p ar am et ri c K o lm o go ro v- Sm ir n o v ðK SÞ te st is th e eq u al it y o f d is tr ib u ti o n s. * p < .1 0 .
** p < .0 5 .
** * p < .0 1. equality of the means is rejected only for the oral mathematics exam .
These results indicate that we need to repeat our multivariate analyses for the mathematics and nonmathematics performance metrics to rule out the possibility that any difference that we may observe is driven by differences in mathematics affinities across genders .
While the tests described above help us understand differences in vari- ous characteristics of performancemetrics , they can not help answerwhether the distribution ofmales ’ performance dominates that of females in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance ðFOSDÞ .
To answer this question , we use the KS-type FOSD test proposed by Barrett and Donald ð2003Þ.34 This test allows us to check for FOSD even when the test variable takes on a limited number of values ðas in the case of the baccalauréat honors or the letter grades during the first year of HECÞ and when the sample sizes differ across males and females .
Weak FOSD is formally defined as follows : given MðxÞ and FðxÞ , the CDF for a variable x for males and females , respectively , M weakly dom- inates F in the FOSD sense ifMðxÞ ≤ FðxÞ for any x .
A rejection of the null hypothesis H0 : FðxÞ ≤ MðxÞ ðin col. 1 of table 5Þ combined with a failure to reject H 0 0 : MðxÞ ≤ FðxÞ ðin col. 2 of table 5Þ would suggest that males ’ performance weakly dominates that of females in an FOSD sense , while the converse finding would suggest that females ’ performance weakly dom- inates that of males .
A failure to reject both null hypotheses would suggest that FðxÞ and MðxÞ can not be ranked in the FOSD sense .
We observe that in the written exam , the performance of males dom- inates that of females in the FOSD sense : in row 1 of table 5 we reject H0 ðFðxÞ ≤MðxÞÞ but we can not reject H00 ðMðxÞ ≤ FðxÞÞ .
Similarly , the test results presented in row 2 of table 5 indicate that during the first stage of the entrance exam , males ’ mathematics performance dominates that of fe- males in the FOSD sense .
In contrast , the tests of row 3 indicate that fe- males ’ nonmathematics performance dominates that of males in the FOSD sense .
These results indicate once more that we need to repeat our multi- variate regressions for the mathematics and nonmathematics parts of the entrance exam separately .
Interestingly , these results do not extend to the oral stage of the en- trance exam , where the CDFs for the performance of males and females can not be ranked in the FOSD sense : in rows 4 , 5 , and 6 of table 5 , neither of the two null hypotheses H0 and H 0 0 can be rejected .
In other words , during the oral exams , neither group dominates the other one in an FOSD 34 Their approach has the advantage of avoiding the problem of test inconsis- tency by comparing cumulative distribution functions ðCDFsÞ of the test variable across the two groups on a continuous basis ðinstead of a fixed number of arbitrary points , say 5 or 10 as inAnderson ½1996 orDavidson andDuclos ½2000Þ .
To conduct the Barrett and Donald ð2003Þ test , we use the GAUSS codes available on Garry Barrett ’ s website : http : //www.economics.unsw.edu.au/GarryBarrett .
470 Ors et al .
sense when using global or mathematics versus nonmathematics perfor- mance metrics .
Of course , this conclusion is obtained in a univariate setting and need not hold in a multivariate setting , something we focus on in Sec- tion V.B below .
Next , using the same cohorts of students , we conduct FOSD tests using academic performance metrics before and after the entrance exam .
Row 7 of table 5 presents FOSD test results for baccalauréat honors .
We observe a nonrejection of the null hypothesis in column 1 together with a rejection in column 2 at the 1 % level .
This suggests that science major female can- didates ’ performance at the end of high school asmeasured by baccalauréat honors dominates that of men in the FOSD sense .
We revisit the potential concern that differences in baccalauréat per- formance may , at least in part , be driven by potential differences in math- ematics ability across genders , which is likely to be reflected in the sub- major choices .
In rows 8 , 9 , and 10 of table 5 , we repeat the same FOSD tests for the three largest categories of science submajors ðmathematics , physics and chemistry , and life sciencesÞ .
We find that the females ’ bac- calauréat performance continues to dominate that of males for all the sci- ence submajors at the 1 % significance level , which suggests that females ’ superior performance during the baccalauréat does not appear to be driven by implicit differences in gender distributions across submajors .
We also provide FOSD tests of performance during core courses in the first year of HEC when the admitted take 11 compulsory classes .
To in- crease the power of our tests , we use letter grades obtained in all compul- sory first-year courses ð5,046 observationsÞ rather than students ’ GPAs ð459 observationsÞ.35 Results provided at the bottom of table 5 indicate that women ’ s performance dominates that of men in the FOSD sense : in row11we can not rejectH0 , but we rejectH 0 0 , albeit at the 10 % level .
Then , we repeat weak FOSD tests after splitting the 11 first-year courses into two groups : five mathematics-oriented courses ðeconomics , finance , quan- titative methods , statistics , and supply chain managementÞ and six non- mathematics-oriented courses ðaccounting , business law , English as a first foreign language , marketing , modeling with Excel , and theory of organi- zationsÞ .
For themathematics-oriented classes ðrow12of table 5Þ , we can not reject either H0 orH 0 0 .
In contrast , for the nonmathematics-oriented classes ðrow 13Þ , we can not reject H0 while we reject H00 at the 1 % level : females weakly dominate males in the FOSD sense in the nonmathematics courses during the first year .
In row 14 of table 5 we obtain a similar , albeit weaker , result with the subsample of students who were a mathematics submajor in 35 All of the459first-year students ðwith a sciencebackgroundÞ inour sample ð226 in2005and233 in2006Þ tookthe11corecourses.However , wehave5,046 lettergrade observations , rather than 5,049 ð5 459 11Þ , because three letter grades are missing in our data .
In our empirical analysis , we do not take into account the differences in ECTS credits across these 11 courses when using letter grades .
Performance Gender Gap 471 Table 5 Tests of First-Order Stochastic Dominance H0 : FðxÞ ≤ MðxÞ ð1Þ H 0 0 : MðxÞ ≤ FðxÞ ð2Þ HEC entrance exam : 1 .
Written exams : overall grade ðweighted averageÞ 1.3279** 1.0171 ð.0294Þ ½males : 2,889 ð.1263Þ ½females : 2,810 2 .
Written math exams ðweighted averageÞ 1.7470*** .7246 ð.0022Þ ½males : 2,889 ð.3499Þ ½females : 2,810 3 .
Written nonmath exams ðweighted averageÞ .5704 1.2865** ð.5217Þ ½males : 2,889 ð.0365Þ ½females : 2,810 4 .
Oral exams : overall grade ðweighted averageÞ 1.0203 .2657 ð.1247Þ ½males : 735 ð.8683Þ ½females : 636 5 .
Oral math exam .9705 .0000 ð.1520Þ ½males : 735 ð1.000Þ ½females : 636 6 .
Oral nonmath exams ðweighted averageÞ .5728 .6708 ð.5188Þ ½males : 735 ð.4065Þ ½females : 636 Baccalauréat honors : 7 .
Science major .0000 5.0031*** ð1.0000Þ ½males : 2,911 ð.0000Þ ½females : 2,819 8 .
Science major , mathematics submajor .0000 4.1480*** ð1.0000Þ ½males : 2,070 ð.0000Þ ½females : 1,958 9 .
Science major , physics and chemistry submajor .0000 2.1001*** ð1.0000Þ ½males : 427 ð.0001Þ ½females : 447 10 .
Science major , life sciences submajor .0000 1.8965*** ð1.0000Þ ½males : 351 ð.0007Þ ½females : 368 HEC first-year letter grades : 11 .
All letter grades combined and all submajors combined .0000 1.1926* ð1.0000Þ ½males : 2,767 ð.0582Þ ½females : 2,279 12 .
First-year letter grades for mathematics-oriented classes .0041 .9997 ð.9999Þ ½males : 1,262 ð.1355Þ ½females : 1,048 high school : we can not rejectH0 , but we reject H 0 0 at the 10 % level .
When we repeat the FOSD tests with the physics and chemistry ðrow 15Þ or life sciences ðrow 16Þ submajors , we fail to reject bothhypotheses.Weconclude that the women ’ s FOSD results during HEC ’ s first year are driven by the mathematics submajors in high school , but through their nonmathematics- oriented classes .
Given the HEC entrance selection process , these results provide a first insight .
The distribution of male candidates ’ written-exam scores has a right tail that is fatter than that of female candidates .
Since roughly only the top quartile of candidates are admitted to the oral exam stage , a larger percentage of men become admissible than women .
This result contrasts with those obtained for the ðnoncompetitiveÞ baccalauréat exam : ðthe sameÞ women in our sample did significantly better than the same men in the baccalauréat exam ðin terms of high school graduation honorsÞ , irrespective of whether they were candidates or admissibles or were eventually admit- ted .
In otherwords , thewomenwhodid relativelyworse thanmen in the top quartile for the HEC entrance contest , which roughly corresponds to the admissibles , actually did better than the samemen at the baccalauréat exam .
When examining the written exam scores , we observe that the male candi- dates have performed better in mathematics than females , with the roles Table 5 ( Continued ) H0 : FðxÞ ≤ MðxÞ ð1Þ H 0 0 : MðxÞ ≤ FðxÞ ð2Þ 13 .
First-year letter grades for nonmathematics-oriented classes .0000 1.9395*** ð1.0000Þ ½males : 1,505 ð.0005Þ ½females : 1231 14 .
First-year letter grades for mathematics submajors .0000 1.0917* ð1.0000Þ ½males : 2,288 ð.0922Þ ½females : 1818 15 .
First-year letter grades for physics and chemistry submajors .1273 .1487 ð.9681Þ ½males : 185 ð.9567Þ ½females : 241 16 .
First-year letter grades for life sciences submajor .0123 .5375 ð.9997Þ ½males : 228 ð.5611Þ ½females : 178 NOTE.—This table presents the results of ðweakÞ first-order stochastic dominance ðFOSDÞ tests of Barrett and Donald ð2003Þ .
H0 : FðxÞ ≤ MðxÞ ðH 00 : MðxÞ ≤ FðxÞÞ corresponds to the null hypothesis that females ’ ðmales ’ Þ performance weakly first-order stochastically dominates that of males ðfemalesÞ .
A rejection of H0 combined with a failure to reject H 0 0 suggests that males ’ performance dominates that of females in an FOSD sense .
p-values are provided below test statistics within parentheses ; sample sizes are within brackets .
GAUSS codes for the FOSD tests are obtained from http : //www.economics.unsw.edu .au/GarryBarrett .
* p < .10 .
** p < .05 .
*** p < .01 .
Table 5 ( Continued ) reversed for nonmathematics-related exams .
Once the selection is made and Performance Gender Gap 473 the top quartile of candidates becomes the admissibles , this observed per- formance difference disappears in the oral exam setting .
These univariate tests do not allow us to control for the observable char- acteristics of the candidates , which may explain part or all of the observed variation in performance across males and females .
As a result , in the next subsection we conduct a series of tests using multivariate regressions that also have the advantage of absorbing the residual variance , which allows for more precise estimates of the differences across genders .
B. Multivariate Regression Analysis Because we would like to examine how the observed difference varies at the tails of the distribution for our academic performance metrics , we use quantile regressions with bootstrapped standard errors ðobtained with 5,000 replicationsÞ that are simultaneously estimated for different percen- tiles .
We limit ourselves to the 10th , 25th , 50th , 75th , and 90th percentiles because ðiÞ they are commonly used in the literature and ðiiÞ the 75th per- centile of candidates ðtop 1,420 observationsÞ approximately corresponds to the admissibles ð1,371 observationsÞ whereas the 90th percentile of candi- dates ðtop 570 observationsÞ very roughly approximates the admitted ð736 observationsÞ .
We include a number of indicator ð “ dummy ” Þ variables ðpreceded byD_Þ in our specifications to control for the various characteristics of candidates .
First , we control for potential differences in the grading distributions across the 3 years in our data using indicator variables for years 2006 and 2007 ðD_2006 and D_2007Þ.36 Second , we account for the fact that non-French candidates ’ performance may be affected in a series of exams conducted in French through the indicator variableD_non-French .
Third , we control for the science submajor chosen during the last year of high school using the indicator variables D_mathematics_submajor , D_physics_and_chemistry_ submajor , and D_life_sciences_submajor .
Fourth , we account for the aca- demic ability of the candidates using indicator variables for any honors they have received during the baccalauréat : D_cum_laude , D_magna_cum_ laude , andD_summa_cum_laude .
Finally , we account for the quality of the 2-year preparation that the candidate followed prior to taking the entrance exam through indicator variables for the individual prep schools .
These prep school “ fixed effects ” ðwhose coefficients are not reported to conserve spaceÞ allow us to control for the unobservable quality of all the prep schools , including the quality of the nonranked ones.37 They also allow us to implic- 36 The year dummies would account for the changes in the quantiles of the grading distributions across the years for both genders.We have no reason to suspect that the potential changes in grading standards would evolve differently for each of the gen- ders .
37 In alternative specifications we used the logarithm of the prep school ranking , which can not take into account the quality of the nonranked institutions as these latter are given the same rank .
The resulting estimates ðwhich are reported in the 474 Ors et al .
itly control for the unobservable academic abilities of the candidates , albeit at the prep school level , that would have played a part in these institutions ’ admission decisions .
Following the inclusion of all the indicator variables mentioned above , the constant term picks up the average grade for the omit- ted group , which includes French males who were not in one of the three most prestigious science submajors in high school , who did not receive any honors during the 2005 baccalauréat , and who did not attend a prep school to prepare for the entrance exam .
Given the focus of our study , D_female is our test variable .
For the oral exam performance regressions , we also use all the grades obtained in the individual written exams , as well as their squared values , in order to be able to extract the maximum amount of information from the data that are at our disposal .
Regression results in which the overall written exam score is the de- pendent variable are presented in table 6 .
First , we focus on the 50th per- centile ðthe median regressionÞ column to get a sense of the coefficient estimates for the various indicator variables included in our specification .
The coefficient estimates for D_2006 and D_2007 are 0.7954 and 0.9799 , respectively , and are statistically significant at the 1 % level , suggesting that there are differences in the performance and/or grading of the candidates across the years .
As we expected , the non-French tend to do less well ðthe coefficient estimate , which is statistically significant at the 1 % level , is equal to20.4711Þ .
There are no discernible differences in the performance of the candidates coming fromdifferent science submajors in high school ðnamely , mathematics , physics and chemistry , and life sciencesÞ compared to the ex- cluded group .
We observe that the baccalauréat honors are very good pre- dictors of performance at the HEC entrance exam : compared to students with no honors , students with a cum laude obtain an average grade 0.8994 points higher ðout of 20Þ , those withmagna cum laude 1.5976 points higher , and those with summa cum laude 2.5888 points higher , all of which are statistically significant at the 1 % level .
Toput these coefficient estimates into perspective , we note that the written exam threshold for a candidate to be- come admissible was 11.64 ðout of 20Þ in 2005 , 12.58 in 2006 , and 12.76 in 2007 , with the highest overall written exam grade obtained being 16.99 in 2005 , 17.47 in 2006 , and 18.30 in 2007 .
These findings for the median re- gression generally extend to the quantile regressions for the 10th , 25th , 75th , and 90th percentiles , with the exception of ðiÞmathematics submajors whose performance is higher only in the regression for the 10th percentile ðalbeit statistically significant at the 10 % levelÞ and ðiiÞ non-French candi- dates whose performance is worse than that of the French candidates ðco- efficient estimates are negative and statistically significantÞ in the regressions for the 10th and 25th percentiles , but not in the regressions for the 75th and 90th percentiles .
online appendix to conserve spaceÞ are not materially different from the ones we report .
Performance Gender Gap 475 T ab le 6 Pe rf or m an ce in th e W ri tt en E xa m ðF ir st St ag e of th e E nt ra nc e E xa m Þ P er ce n ti le 10 th 25 th 50 th 75 th 90 th C o n st an t 3 .
64 83 ** * 3 .
96 00 ** * 5 .
15 38 ** * 6 .
64 23 ** * 8 .
57 49 ** * ð.4 63 5Þ ð.3 74 4Þ ð.4 99 4Þ ð.4 82 8Þ ð.7 56 9Þ D _ 20 06 .7 59 3* ** .8 10 0* ** .7 95 4* ** .8 03 3* ** .8 00 4* ** ð.1 02 7Þ ð.0 82 7Þ ð.0 82 0Þ ð.0 96 2Þ ð.1 13 8Þ D _ 20 07 .8 30 0* ** .9 20 0* ** .9 79 9* ** 1 .
01 80 ** * .9 40 4* ** ð.1 08 4Þ ð.0 87 6Þ ð.0 79 4Þ ð.0 92 7Þ ð.1 17 6Þ D _ fe m al e 2 .1 35 7 2 .2 56 2* ** 2 .3 48 8* ** 2 .5 15 3* ** 2 .6 64 6* ** ð.0 87 3Þ ð.0 72 8Þ ð.0 63 4Þ ð.0 76 7Þ ð.0 94 0Þ D _ n o n -F re n ch 2 .4 82 3* ** 2 .4 10 5* * 2 .4 71 1* ** 2 .2 93 7 2 .2 44 8 ð.1 84 5Þ ð.1 61 8Þ ð.1 34 2Þ ð.1 87 5Þ ð.2 55 8Þ D _ m at h em at ic s_ su b m aj o r .6 33 0* .4 83 5 .1 54 6 .1 08 0 .3 44 4 ð.3 36 1Þ ð.2 95 5Þ ð.2 86 9Þ ð.2 74 3Þ ð.2 11 2Þ D _ p h y si cs _ an d _ ch em is tr y _ su b m aj o r .1 96 0 .0 85 2 2 .3 35 4 2 .4 36 7 2 .1 56 7 ð.3 53 3Þ ð.3 04 4Þ ð.2 95 7Þ ð.2 81 9Þ ð.2 38 8Þ D _ li fe _ sc ie n ce s_ su b m aj o r .2 29 7 .0 62 5 2 .1 34 2 2 .0 70 0 .0 67 8 ð.3 56 6Þ ð.3 09 8Þ ð.2 99 5Þ ð.2 86 1Þ ð.2 49 3Þ D _ cu m _ la u d e .5 74 7* ** .8 83 3* ** .8 99 4* ** .8 22 3* ** .7 61 1* ** ð.1 92 2Þ ð.1 34 3Þ ð.1 75 9Þ ð.1 91 2Þ ð.2 17 5Þ D _ m ag n a_ cu m _ la u d e 1 .
22 00 ** * 1 .
59 17 ** * 1 .
59 76 ** * 1 .
44 90 ** * 1 .
52 57 ** * ð.1 88 0Þ ð.1 37 4Þ ð.1 82 2Þ ð.1 95 0Þ ð.2 23 9Þ D _ su m m a_ cu m _ la u d e 2 .
13 03 ** * 2 .
54 87 ** * 2 .
58 88 ** * 2 .
37 80 ** * 2 .
59 23 ** * ð.2 12 8Þ ð.1 58 7Þ ð.1 92 9Þ ð .2 09 4Þ ð.2 45 5Þ P re p sc h o o l fi xe d ef fe ct s Y es O b se rv at io n s 5 , 63 5 P se u d o -R 2 .2 59 4 .2 60 9 .2 65 2 .2 49 9 .2 42 0 N O T E .— T h is ta b le p re se n ts q u an ti le re gr es si o n m o d el s th at ar e si m u lt an eo u sl y es ti m at ed , w h er e th e d ep en d en t va ri ab le is th e w ei gh te d av er ag e o f w ri tt en ex am gr ad es , w it h su b je ct m at te r w ei gh ts as d et ai le d in ta b le 1 .
In d ic at o r va ri ab le s ar e p re ce d ed b y th e p re fi x D _ .
T h e re gr es si o n m o d el in cl u d es p re p sc h o o l fi xe d ef fe ct s ðn o t re p o rt ed Þ .
B o o ts tr ap st an d ar d er ro rs ðp re se n te d w it h in p ar en th es es b el o w th e co ef fi ci en t es ti m at es Þa re o b ta in ed w it h 5 , 00 0 re p li ca ti o n s. * p < .1 0 .
** p < .0 5 .
** * p < .0 1 .
For our test variable , results in table 6 show that the coefficient estimate for theD_female variable is20.1357 in the regression for the10thpercentile , 20.2562 for the 25th percentile , 20.3488 for the 50th percentile , 20.5153 for the 75th percentile , and 20.6646 for the 90th percentile , all of which are statistically significant at the 1 % level except the first one , which is not statistically significant.38Hence , after controlling for the potential differences in grading and/or cohorts ’ ability across the years , candidates ’ affinity for mathematics ðindirectly , through the high school submajor indicator vari- ablesÞ , candidates ’ academic ability ðdirectly using the baccalauréat honors they received 2 years ago as well as indirectly using the prep school fixed effectsÞ , and whether they hold French nationality or not , we find that women , on average , do worse than men in the written exam in the regres- sions for the 25th , 50th , 75th , and 90th percentiles .
To get a sense of the economic significance of the observed difference for the females , we look at the effect of hypothetically adjusting the threshold for admission for the females .
In this exercise we recalculate the propor- tion of females among the admissibles after decreasing the year-specific written exam threshold to become admissible by 0.3488 ðthe coefficient estimate forD_female in the quantile regression for the medianÞ and after applying this hypothetical threshold to females alone .
As a result of this exercise , which is admittedly unfair to males , the proportion of females among the admissibles increases from 46.32 % to 50.64 % , suggesting that the effects we observe are economically nonnegligible .
Another way to ar- gue for the economic significance for the underperformance is to note that females with no honors would need to have cum laude honors compared to males with no honors in order to be able to compensate for their lower performance during the written exam.39 We conclude that the results of table 6 corroborate those obtained in univariate tests : in the written exam , women underperform men in the re- gressions at the 25th , 50th , 75th , and 90th percentiles of the performance distribution , while there is no statistically significant performance difference between the two genders at the 10th percentile regression .
We should note that while women outperform men in the lower tail of the written exam average in a univariate setting ðe.g. , at the 10th percentile of the distribution in table 4Þ , we find no such difference in a multivariate setting ðthe coef- 38 In an alternative specification , which uses the logarithm of prep school rank instead of prep school fixed effects , we obtain quantitatively similar results .
These estimates are reported in app .
table A1 .
39 That said , obtaining cum laude honors would overcompensate for the females ’ underperformance given that the positive coefficient estimate in table 6 for D_cum_ laude is larger than the negative coefficient estimate for D_female .
For example , in the regression for the 50th percentile regression , the coefficient estimate for D_ female is equal to20.3488 whereas the coefficient estimate forD_cum_laude is equal to 0.8994 ðboth of them statistically significant at the 1 % levelÞ .
Performance Gender Gap 477 ficient estimate forD_female , which is equal to20.1357 , is not statistically significantÞ .
These findings suggest that it is important to control for the observable characteristics of the candidates before reaching any conclu- sions .
Next , we explore whether our findings of lower performance for fe- males in the written exam might be driven by differences in performance in the mathematics versus nonmathematics tests , for two reasons .
First , the univariate test results reported in tables 4 and 5 suggest that there are performance differences between genders across the written mathematics versus nonmathematics exams .
Given that mathematics grades account for one-third of the written entrance exam ’ s total score for the science track candidates ðsee table 1Þ , we would like to rule out the possibility that our results are actually driven by the mathematics scores .
Second , there appear to be differences across genders in perceptions of own abilities in scientific and nonscientific fields ðsee , e.g. , Niederle and Vesterlund ½2010 for a dis- cussionÞ.40 To examine whether potential mathematics affinity differences across genders play a role , we run the same quantile regressions separately for the mathematics and nonmathematics parts of the written exam , using their respectiveweighted-average exam scores .
Results are reported in tables 7 and 8 , respectively .
For the written mathematics and nonmathematics ex- ams , results are qualitatively similar to those obtained in table 6 using the overall written exam performance .
Focusing on our test variable , D_female , for the weighted-average score of the two mathematics exams taken during the first stage , we find that the coefficient estimate in table 7 is equal to 20.1267 for the regression at the10th percentile,20.3877 at the 25th per- centile , 20.7830 at the 50th percentile , 21.1051 at the 75th percentile , and 21.2504 at the 90th percentile .
All these coefficient estimates are statistically significant at the 1 % level except that for the 10th percentile , which is not statistically significant .
Importantly , we observe a similar pattern in table 8 for the nonmathematics exams ’ weighted-average scorewith all thewritten exams except the two mathematics exams .
The coefficient estimate for D_female is equal to 20.0632 for the regression for the 10th percentile , 20.1453 for the 25thpercentile,20.2242 for the 50thpercentile,20.2747 for the 75th percentile , and20.2968 for the 90th percentile .
These estimates are all statistically significant ðat the 5 % or 1 % levelÞ except for the 10th per- centile regression .
Together , these results indicate that the performance difference that we observe for females in table 6 for the global written exam 40 For example , Beyer ð2002Þ finds differences in self-valuation between men and women in a mathematics test but no difference in an English test or in a history and geography test .
Similarly , Beyer et al .
ð2004Þ provide evidence that female un- dergraduate students majoring in management information systems underestimate their ability to a greater extent thandomale students , whileBeyer , Rynes , andHaller ð2004Þ find that women have lower confidence levels than men in their ability in computer sciences .
478 Ors et al .
T ab le 7 Pe rf or m an ce in th e W ri tt en M at he m at ic s E xa m s P er ce n ti le 10 th 25 th 50 th 75 th 90 th C o n st an t 2 .8 08 8 2 .0 40 1 2 .
32 61 ** * 5 .
20 27 ** * 7 .
57 24 ** * ð.5 59 3Þ ð.6 71 2Þ ð.8 13 2Þ ð1 .1 86 6Þ ð1 .1 57 2Þ D _ 20 06 1 .
08 91 ** * 1 .
15 76 ** * 1 .
24 03 ** * .9 19 4* ** .8 62 5* ** ð.1 79 5Þ ð.1 47 9Þ ð.1 58 7Þ ð.1 85 4Þ ð.1 95 7Þ D _ 20 07 1 .
09 00 ** * 1 .
41 65 ** * 1 .
63 09 ** * 1 .
44 16 ** * 1 .
43 84 ** * ð.2 03 1Þ ð.1 54 1Þ ð.1 54 1Þ ð.1 95 4Þ ð.2 18 9Þ D _ fe m al e 2 .1 26 7 2 .3 87 7* ** 2 .7 83 0* ** 2 1 .
10 51 ** * 2 1 .
25 04 ** * ð.1 52 0Þ ð.1 21 4Þ ð.1 24 8Þ ð.1 30 1Þ ð.1 57 3Þ D _ n o n -F re n ch 2 .6 63 9* 2 .5 84 6* * 2 .7 10 9* * 2 .3 52 4 2 .1 43 9 ð.3 48 7Þ ð.2 98 1Þ ð.3 20 8Þ ð.3 73 5Þ ð.3 19 1Þ D _ m at h em at ic s_ su b m aj o r .7 35 8* .6 15 9 .2 13 6 2 .2 57 9 .1 73 9 ð.3 83 6Þ ð.4 65 4Þ ð.5 85 3Þ ð.5 93 6Þ ð.5 08 0Þ D _ p h y si cs _ an d _ ch em is tr y _ su b m aj o r 2 .1 45 8 2 .5 29 7 2 .8 33 6 2 1 .
76 25 ** * 2 1 .
36 22 ** ð.4 17 5Þ ð.4 71 9Þ ð.6 03 4Þ ð.6 11 3Þ ð.5 46 7Þ D _ li fe _ sc ie n ce s_ su b m aj o r 2 .4 82 4 2 .4 69 9 2 .5 48 5 2 .9 80 3 2 .7 02 7 ð.4 10 4Þ ð.4 81 7Þ ð.6 11 9Þ ð.6 14 0Þ ð.5 35 3Þ D _ cu m _ la u d e .9 83 0* ** 1 .
34 56 ** * 1 .
32 30 ** * 1 .
40 89 ** * 1 .
32 60 ** * ð.3 18 9Þ ð.2 57 6Þ ð.2 79 0Þ ð.3 29 0Þ ð.4 24 5Þ D _ m ag n a_ cu m _ la u d e 2 .
04 70 ** * 2 .
58 22 ** * 2 .
47 88 ** * 2 .
55 01 ** * 2 .
50 19 ** * ð.3 29 0Þ ð.2 58 3Þ ð.2 96 1Þ ð.3 41 8Þ ð .4 42 2Þ D _ su m m a_ cu m _ la u d e 3 .
30 97 ** * 3 .
72 71 ** * 3 .
87 91 ** * 4 .
09 54 ** * 3 .
88 59 ** * ð.3 64 2Þ ð.2 84 9Þ ð.3 31 7Þ ð.3 69 3Þ ð.4 69 0Þ P re p sc h o o l fi xe d ef fe ct s Y es O b se rv at io n s 5 , 63 5 P se u d o -R 2 .2 10 7 .2 18 0 .2 24 8 .2 32 1 .2 22 7 N O T E .— T h is ta b le p re se n ts q u an ti le re gr es si o n m o d el s th at ar e si m u lt an eo u sl y es ti m at ed , w h er e th e d ep en d en t va ri ab le is th e w ei gh te d av er ag e o f w ri tt en m at h em at ic s ex am gr ad es ðo f w h ic h th er e ar e tw o Þ , w it h su b je ct m at te r w ei gh ts as d et ai le d in ta b le 1 .
In d ic at o r va ri ab le s ar e p re ce d ed b y th e p re fi x D _ .
T h e re gr es si o n m o d el in cl u d es p re p sc h o o l fi xe d ef fe ct s ðn o t re p o rt ed Þ .
B o o ts tr ap st an d ar d er ro rs ðp re se n te d w it h in p ar en th es es b el o w th e co ef fi ci en t es ti m at es Þa re o b ta in ed w it h 5 , 00 0 re p li ca ti o n s. * p < .1 0 .
** p < .0 5 .
** * p < .0 1 .
T ab le 8 Pe rf or m an ce in th e W ri tt en N on m at he m at ic s E xa m s P er ce n ti le 10 th 25 th 50 th 75 th 90 th C o n st an t 4 .
89 68 ** * 5 .
70 95 ** * 6 .
91 89 ** * 8 .
43 58 ** * 10 .3 87 4* ** ð.4 87 2Þ ð.3 89 7Þ ð.4 42 4Þ ð.5 01 2Þ ð.7 80 9Þ D _ 20 06 .4 21 1* ** .5 91 6* ** .5 91 6* ** .5 56 8* ** .5 13 7* ** ð.0 99 5Þ ð.0 81 2Þ ð.0 80 8Þ ð.0 91 0Þ ð.1 12 8Þ D _ 20 07 .6 80 0* ** .6 72 3* ** .6 91 6* ** .5 87 4* ** .4 65 3* ** ð.1 01 6Þ ð.0 82 1Þ ð.0 83 1Þ ð.0 85 2Þ ð.1 06 9Þ D _ fe m al e 2 .0 63 2 2 .1 45 3* * 2 .2 24 2* ** 2 .2 74 7* ** 2 .2 96 8* ** ð.0 85 5Þ ð.0 69 3Þ ð.0 69 4Þ ð.0 69 6Þ ð.0 91 1Þ D _ n o n -F re n ch 2 .3 66 3* * 2 .3 87 4* ** 2 .3 33 7* * 2 .2 16 8 2 .1 78 9 ð.1 86 6Þ ð.1 34 1Þ ð.1 52 9Þ ð.1 63 3Þ ð.2 09 7Þ D _ m at h em at ic s_ su b m aj o r .4 94 7* .5 06 7* * .3 71 6 .0 92 6 2 .3 13 7 ð.2 98 8Þ ð.2 48 0Þ ð.3 21 9Þ ð.3 35 7Þ ð.4 27 0Þ D _ p h y si cs _ an d _ ch em is tr y _ su b m aj o r .4 54 7 .4 40 7* .2 85 3 2 .0 23 2 2 .3 89 5 ð.3 20 3Þ ð.2 60 4Þ ð.3 31 8Þ ð.3 43 9Þ ð.4 34 1Þ D _ li fe _ sc ie n ce s_ su b m aj o r .4 27 4 .5 78 2* * .4 78 9 .1 23 2 2 .2 40 0 ð.3 26 9Þ ð.2 63 6Þ ð.3 30 4Þ ð.3 46 7Þ ð.4 39 0Þ D _ cu m _ la u d e .4 21 1* * .5 86 0* ** .6 64 2* ** .5 30 5* ** .2 73 7 ð.1 64 1Þ ð.1 31 0Þ ð.1 41 9Þ ð.2 03 1Þ ð.2 12 7Þ D _ m ag n a_ cu m _ la u d e .7 34 7* ** .9 24 9* ** 1 .
03 47 ** * .9 45 3* ** .7 70 5* ** ð.1 73 6Þ ð.1 33 9Þ ð.1 43 0Þ ð.2 04 0Þ ð.2 12 2Þ D _ su m m a_ cu m _ la u d e 1 .
36 63 ** * 1 .
73 12 ** * 1 .
90 11 ** * 1 .
84 11 ** * 1 .
53 68 ** * ð.2 00 1Þ ð.1 53 9Þ ð.1 59 9Þ ð.2 11 9Þ ð.2 31 6Þ P re p sc h o o l fi xe d ef fe ct s Y es O b se rv at io n s 5 , 63 5 P se u d o -R 2 .1 88 6 .1 71 5 .1 65 3 .1 56 5 .1 43 8 N O T E .— T h is ta b le p re se n ts q u an ti le re gr es si o n m o d el s th at ar e si m u lt an eo u sl y es ti m at ed , w h er e th e d ep en d en t va ri ab le is th e w ei gh te d av er ag e o f w ri tt en n o n m at h em at ic s ex am gr ad es , w it h su b je ct m at te r w ei gh ts as d et ai le d in ta b le 1 .
In d ic at o r va ri ab le s ar e p re ce d ed b y th e p re fi x D _ .T h e re gr es si o n m o d el in cl u d es p re p sc h o o l fi xe d ef fe ct s ðn o t re p o rt ed Þ .
B o o ts tr ap st an d ar d er ro rs ðp re se n te d w it h in p ar en th es es b el o w th e co ef fi ci en t es ti m at es Þa re o b ta in ed w it h 5 , 00 0 re p li ca ti o n s. * p < .1 0 .
** p < .0 5 .
** * p < .0 1. grade for the various percentiles is not driven by differences inmathematics alone : in the regressions at the 25th , 50th , 75th , and 90th percentiles , men ’ s performance is higher thanwomen ’ s , with the differences being statistically significant irrespective of whether the evaluations are based on mathemat- ics or not.41 While we observe a similar pattern of increasing differences in the gen- der performance gap for mathematics and nonmathematics exams , the co- efficient estimates reported in tables 7 and 8 are not directly comparable since the standard deviation of written mathematics exams ’ score ð4.25Þ is more than twice as large as that for nonmathematics exams ð2.07Þ .
To make the coefficient estimates of D_female comparable across tables 7 and 8 , we standardize the coefficient estimates by multiplying each with the standard deviation of the explanatory variable and dividing by the standard deviation of the dependent variable .
The standardized coefficient estimates ðnot reportedÞ suggest that the wedge between the performance of males and females is larger for mathematics : the standardized coefficient esti- mates for D_female for mathematics exams are 1.3 , 1.7 , 1.9 , and 2.0 times larger than the standardized estimates for nonmathematics exams in the regressions at the 25th , 50th , 75th , and 90th percentiles , respectively .
It should also be noted that the weight of the nonmathematics fields in the overall written exam score is 63.33 % , which is almost double that of the mathematics weight .
Together , these two observations suggest that , for example , at the 90th percentile of the ðoverallÞ written exam performance distribution , the mathematics and nonmathematics fields contribute ap- proximately equally to the observed difference in performance .
In other words , men ’ s higher performance in mathematics is not the sole driver of the gender performance gap that we observe in the written exam : even though the mathematics exams have a higher impact than those in the nonmathematics-related fields , the latter , compared to the former , have al- most twice the weight in the overall performance metric for the written exam .
Finally , given the differences observed in table 3 in the proportion of genders across mathematics submajors on the one hand ð48.61 % femalesÞ and the physics and chemistry or life sciences submajors ð51.14 % and 51.12 % females , respectivelyÞ on the other , we also reestimate the simulta- neous quantile regressions of table 6 for these subsamples separately : the results for the mathematics submajor in high school on the one hand ðin on- line app .
table A4Þ and the physics and chemistry and life sciences sub- majors on the other ðin app .
table A5Þ mirror very closely those of table 6 .
We conclude that our results are not solely driven by the mathematics sub- major as the univariate tests of table 3 may have suggested .
41 We obtain similar results if the logarithm of prep school rank is used to con- trol for quality of the preparation received .
These estimates are presented in online app .
tables A2 and A3 to conserve space .
Performance Gender Gap 481 Next , we turn our attention to the second stage of the entrance exam .
Table 9 presents the results of the oral exam performance regressions us- ing simultaneous quantile regressions , with bootstrapped standard errors ðwith 5,000 replicationsÞ , for the 25th , 50th , and 75th percentiles .
The choice of these percentiles is guided by the fact that the admitted roughly corre- spond to the 75th percentile of the admissibles sample taking the oral ex- ams.42 On the right-hand-side of the oral exam performance specification , we add the grades for all the written exams in various subjects as well as their squared values in order to better control for the academic aptitudes of the admissibles as reflected in the grades of the first stage .
Results for the weighted-average oral exams ðwith the weights as detailed in table 1Þ , re- ported in columns 1–3 of table 9 , indicate that the performance difference at the higher end of the distribution that we observe for females during the first stage of the entrance exam remains during the second stage : D_female coefficient estimates are20.2052,20.2036 , and20.2780 for the quantile re- gressions at the 25th , 50th , and 75th percentiles , respectively.However , these results are weaker , with only the coefficient estimate at the 75th percentile being marginally significant at the 10 % level .
We would like to note that , given the smaller sample size for the admissibles versus the candidates ð1,366 vs. 5,635observations , respectivelyÞ , the coefficient estimates of the oral exam performance regressions are less precise than those of the written exam .
The oral mathematics exam results ðcols .
4–6 of table 9Þ also indicate a lower performance for females , but only at the 25th percentile : coeffi- cient estimates for the dummy variable D_female are 20.7340 , 20.2992 , and 20.2679 for the regressions at the 25th , 50th , and 75th percentiles , respectively , with only the coefficient estimate for the 25th quartile be- ing statistically significant ðat the 5 % levelÞ .
The results for the weighted average of oral nonmathematics exams ðcols .
7–9 of table 9Þmirror those of columns 1–3 : the coefficient estimates for D_female are 20.0383 , 20.1632 , and 20.3574 for the quantile regressions at the 25th , 50th , and 75th percentiles , respectively , with only the coefficient estimate at the 75th percentile being statistically significant at the 5 % level .
These results are weaker than those obtained for the written exams .
They nevertheless suggest that the females still underperform males in the highest quartile , with the observed effect being driven by nonmathematics-related fields , which is surprising given the results of univariate tests reported in ta- ble 4 .
In fact , this finding is comforting since it suggests that the se- lection process is not solely driven by the potentially higher mathematics affinity of males .
However , it should also be noted that the coefficient estimates for the oral exams are also less precise : the sample size of admis- sibles in table 9 is roughly one-fourth of the sample size of candidates in ta- ble 6 .
Finally , we reestimate the regressions of table 9 for the subsample of 42 We do not consider the 10th or the 90th percentiles because of the lower num- ber of observations for the admissibles .
482 Ors et al .
admissibles who majored in mathematics ðapp .
table A6Þ and those who majored in physics and chemistry or the life sciences ðapp .
table A7Þ .
In appendix table A6 , women ’ s underperformance results for the 1,069 ad- missibles who are mathematics submajors are stronger than those of table 9 ðin terms of estimates with statistical significanceÞ .
In contrast , we find no evidence of underperformance for the physics and chemistry or the life sciences majors , noting that we have only 275 observations for this sub- sample in the oral exam stage .
Next , we turn our attention to the less competitive academic evalua- tions that the same students went through : the noncompetitive baccalau- réat exam 2 years prior to the entrance exam and the less competitive first- year core courses at HEC .
To examine performance differences across genders in the baccalauréat exam , we estimate a series of linear probabil- ity models .
In the main set of regressions , the dependent variable is equal to one if the candidate obtained the high school diploma with at least a certain level of honors ðcum laude , magna cum laude , or summa cum laudeÞ and zero for the group that got a simple pass ðwith no honorsÞ .
For exam- ple , for the group that has obtained the baccalauréat with at least magna cum laude , the dependent variable is equal to one if the candidate has ob- tained the high school diplomawithmagna cum laude or summa cum laude and zero if the candidate got no honors ; the candidates with cum laude honors are excluded .
In these regressions , where the base case is always the group with no honors , we control for the two characteristics of the can- didates that were observable as of the date of the exam : the category of sci- ence submajor in high school and whether the candidate is a non-French national.We also include the year indicator variables to control for changes in the difficulty of the baccalauréat and/or the distribution of its evaluation standards across the years .
In these regressions we use heteroskedasticity- consistent ði.e. , “ robust ” Þ standard errors because the linear probability mod- els are heteroskedastic by construction .
The results , presented in columns 1–3 of table 10 , indicate that the female candidates , who eventually do worse than males during the HEC entrance exam , actually do better than the same male candidates during the baccalauréat exam .
Irrespective of the honors type , the coefficient es- timate for D_female is positive and statistically significant at the 1 % level : the probability of a candidate obtaining the baccalauréat degree with hon- ors is higher for females .
The coefficient estimate for D_female is 0.0503 ðcol .
1Þ for the groupwith at least cum laude ðwhich is inclusive of all honors groupsÞ , 0.0782 ðcol .
2Þ for the group with at least magna cum laude , and 0.2129 ðcol .
3Þ for the group with at least summa cum laude .
The relative probability of a female obtaining an honor appears to increase with the level of the honors.43 43 We do not provide a formal test of equality of coefficient estimates across equations as all the models in table 10 are estimated with overlapping data .
Performance Gender Gap 483 T ab le 9 Pe rf or m an ce in th e O ra lE xa m St ag e ðS ec on d St ag e of th e E nt ra nc e E xa m Þ O ra l E xa m s ’ W ei gh te d A ve ra ge O ra l M at h E xa m Sc o re O ra l N o n m at h E xa m s ’ W ei gh te d A ve ra ge 25 th ð1 Þ 50 th ð2 Þ 75 th ð3 Þ 25 th ð4 Þ 50 th ð5 Þ 75 th ð6 Þ 25 th ð7 Þ 50 th ð8 Þ 75 th ð9 Þ C o n st an t .1 51 9 3 .
26 84 .9 27 4 2 5 .
30 16 2 .
66 98 5 .
00 89 2 .8 09 7 2 .
51 87 4 .
50 78 ð3 .9 76 8Þ ð3 .4 31 8Þ ð3 .4 66 5Þ ð6 .8 06 3Þ ð7 .2 06 9Þ ð2 .1 0e 1 15 Þ ð4 .8 35 7Þ ð4 .8 37 5Þ ð4 .6 54 9Þ D _ 20 06 2 .5 11 0* ** 2 .5 88 7* ** 2 .5 47 0* ** 2 .7 12 0* 2 .8 32 0* * 2 .8 26 9 2 .5 29 7* * 2 .4 37 4* 2 .4 89 7* * ð.1 88 4Þ ð.1 83 7Þ ð.1 99 3Þ ð.3 63 7Þ ð.3 48 0Þ ð3 6 .
41 33 Þ ð.2 08 2Þ ð .2 24 7Þ ð.2 37 7Þ D _ 20 07 2 .9 57 7* ** 2 .9 10 7* ** 2 .8 06 0* ** 2 2 .
30 84 ** * 2 2 .
03 42 ** * 2 1 .
84 57 2 .4 97 7* * 2 .5 99 6* * 2 .5 48 4* * ð.2 02 0Þ ð.1 83 7Þ ð.2 07 4Þ ð.3 65 7Þ ð.3 98 2Þ ð4 .7 52 5Þ ð.2 24 1Þ ð.2 53 0Þ ð.2 37 0Þ D _ fe m al e 2 .2 05 2 2 .2 03 6 2 .2 78 0* 2 .7 34 0* * 2 .2 99 2 2 .2 67 9 2 .0 38 3 2 .1 63 2 2 .3 57 4* * ð.1 43 0Þ ð.1 41 7Þ ð.1 64 1Þ ð.3 02 1Þ ð.2 79 8Þ ð3 4 .
18 85 Þ ð.1 68 8Þ ð.1 70 7Þ ð.1 79 1Þ D _ n o n -F re n ch .4 42 5 2 .0 94 3 .0 31 6 .3 87 9 .4 43 8 .4 93 2 .1 38 4 2 .3 83 1 2 .1 49 7 ð.3 32 0Þ ð.3 10 7Þ ð.3 54 9Þ ð.6 64 5Þ ð.7 75 6Þ ð2 7 .
87 62 Þ ð.3 33 1Þ ð.3 98 7Þ ð.4 21 0Þ D _ m at h em at ic s_ su b m aj o r .0 93 2 2 .3 68 6 .2 60 1 .6 50 7 1 .
03 08 .0 69 5 .3 39 9 2 .9 10 9 2 .1 75 2 ð.9 69 6Þ ð.5 96 7Þ ð.6 38 8Þ ð.9 63 2Þ ð1 .3 32 5Þ ð2 .1 0e 1 15 Þ ð1 .0 44 4Þ ð1 .0 62 2Þ ð.6 54 0Þ D _ p h y si cs _ an d _ ch em is tr y _ su b m aj o r 2 .0 47 7 2 .5 33 9 .1 16 8 .6 60 0 .3 53 7 2 1 .
15 85 .3 62 3 2 .5 82 8 .0 68 3 ð.9 92 1Þ ð.6 39 4Þ ð.6 75 8Þ ð1 .0 16 4Þ ð1 .3 74 3Þ ð2 .1 0e 1 15 Þ ð1 .0 75 1Þ ð1 .0 93 0Þ ð.7 00 8Þ D _ li fe _ sc ie n ce s_ su b m aj o r .2 00 8 2 .2 87 0 .1 33 8 .2 34 0 .4 91 4 2 1 .
03 25 .7 21 7 2 .7 34 8 .0 01 6 ð.9 89 0Þ ð.6 18 7Þ ð.6 63 4Þ ð 1 .0 60 4Þ ð1 .3 79 7Þ ð2 .1 0e 1 15 Þ ð1 .0 68 6Þ ð1 .0 79 4Þ ð.6 84 1Þ D _ cu m _ la u d e 2 .0 34 3 2 .7 19 3 2 .6 55 0 1 .
14 21 2 .6 79 2 2 3 .
09 24 .3 43 1 2 .4 87 1 2 .1 98 4 ð.8 09 4Þ ð.5 87 1Þ ð.7 25 8Þ ð1 .7 63 6Þ ð2 .1 71 5Þ ð2 1 .
68 85 Þ ð.7 05 2Þ ð.7 09 5Þ ð.7 58 8Þ D _ m ag n a_ cu m _ la u d e .0 02 1 2 .2 61 6 .0 34 2 1 .
55 05 .4 01 8 2 2 .
27 78 .4 46 3 2 .1 91 4 .4 89 0 ð.8 08 8Þ ð.5 84 5Þ ð.7 25 3Þ ð1 .7 60 8Þ ð2 .1 59 3Þ ð8 .7 71 5Þ ð.6 73 1Þ ð.7 15 4Þ ð.7 44 5Þ D _ su m m a_ cu m _ la u d e .3 63 1 .0 96 6 .3 02 0 2 .
05 34 .6 91 1 2 1 .
66 10 .7 53 9 .1 74 1 .6 75 8 ð.8 21 5Þ ð.5 96 7Þ ð.7 46 5Þ ð1 .7 92 0 Þ ð2 .1 74 3Þ ð4 7 .
51 80 Þ ð.6 91 5Þ ð.7 34 1Þ ð.7 46 3Þ 1s t_ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e .3 71 0 .2 67 6 .3 64 3 2 .3 12 9 2 .1 55 2 2 .3 66 0 .7 04 4* ** .6 67 1* * .8 28 8* ** ð.2 58 7Þ ð.2 28 0Þ ð.2 89 2Þ ð.4 62 2Þ ð.4 96 8Þ ð7 .0 34 8Þ ð.2 59 5Þ ð.2 73 5Þ ð.2 90 1Þ 484 O ra l E xa m s ’ W ei gh te d A ve ra ge O ra l M at h E xa m Sc o re O ra l N o n m at h E x- am s ’ W ei gh te d A ve ra ge 1s t_ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e2 2 .0 10 6 2 .0 06 5 2 .0 09 7 .0 11 9 .0 03 1 .0 11 8 2 .0 21 0* * 2 .0 18 6* 2 .0 25 4* * ð.0 10 1Þ ð.0 08 9Þ ð.0 10 8Þ ð.0 18 0Þ ð.0 18 8Þ ð.6 30 9Þ ð.0 10 2Þ ð.0 10 4Þ ð.0 10 9Þ 2n d _ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e .0 91 1 2 .0 44 7 2 .0 07 5 2 .0 11 0 .2 57 1 .0 51 7 .0 42 3 2 .2 33 1 2 .3 84 0 ð.3 05 5Þ ð.2 23 5Þ ð.2 51 2Þ ð.3 82 9Þ ð.4 28 2Þ ð1 3 .
60 46 Þ ð.3 33 5Þ ð.3 41 1Þ ð.2 55 6Þ 2n d _ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e2 .0 00 8 .0 06 0 .0 03 5 .0 01 2 2 .0 09 3 2 .0 01 2 .0 03 9 .0 14 1 .0 20 8* * ð.0 12 0Þ ð.0 09 0Þ ð.0 10 1Þ ð.0 15 8Þ ð.0 17 3Þ ð.5 04 1Þ ð.0 13 2Þ ð.0 13 4Þ ð.0 10 3Þ F re n ch 2 .4 44 7* ** 2 .2 39 8* 2 .1 15 1 2 .3 77 6 2 .1 87 8 .3 49 4 2 .2 19 7 2 .2 90 8* 2 .2 82 6 ð.1 65 8Þ ð.1 37 3Þ ð.1 42 5Þ ð.2 96 2Þ ð.2 51 1Þ ð2 0 .
60 02 Þ ð.2 00 1Þ ð.1 69 1Þ ð.1 72 5Þ F re n ch 2 .0 20 2* ** .0 12 0* * .0 07 4 .0 16 9 .0 09 2 2 .0 11 0 .0 10 3 .0 13 6* * .0 13 6* ð.0 06 7Þ ð.0 05 7Þ ð.0 05 8Þ ð.0 12 3Þ ð.0 10 5Þ ð.7 99 2Þ ð.0 08 1Þ ð.0 06 9Þ ð.0 07 2Þ G en er al _ cu lt u re 2 .0 85 7 2 .0 18 4 .0 62 6 .2 70 5 2 .0 95 9 .1 20 2 2 .0 73 7 2 .0 70 1 .0 78 4 ð.1 29 5Þ ð.1 21 4Þ ð.1 28 7Þ ð.3 01 2Þ ð.2 48 5Þ ð1 1 .
72 07 Þ ð.1 61 5Þ ð.1 58 3Þ ð.1 53 6Þ G en er al _ cu lt u re 2 .0 05 2 .0 02 5 2 .0 00 9 2 .0 12 1 .0 02 0 2 .0 05 4 .0 05 3 .0 04 5 2 .0 00 5 ð.0 05 4Þ ð.0 04 8Þ ð.0 05 2Þ ð.0 12 1Þ ð.0 10 2Þ ð.7 94 1Þ ð.0 06 5Þ ð.0 06 3Þ ð.0 06 3Þ H is to ry _ an d _ ge o gr ap h y .1 63 9 .1 94 9 .2 82 2* .1 18 0 .1 44 2 .1 05 8 .1 32 8 .1 99 9 .3 66 8* ð.1 51 4Þ ð.1 29 9Þ ð.1 57 2Þ ð.2 83 6Þ ð.2 90 0Þ ð5 5 .
80 69 Þ ð.1 74 2Þ ð.1 69 6Þ ð.1 89 9Þ H is to ry _ an d _ ge o gr ap h y 2 2 .0 03 3 2 .0 04 5 2 .0 08 2 2 .0 00 7 2 .0 04 5 2 .0 02 1 2 .0 01 4 2 .0 03 8 2 .0 11 6 ð.0 06 0Þ ð.0 05 2Þ ð.0 06 1Þ ð.0 10 9Þ ð.0 11 0Þ ð2 .3 09 3Þ ð.0 06 8Þ ð.0 06 7Þ ð.0 07 4Þ M at h em at ic s_ 1 2 .1 45 8 2 .0 46 2 2 .0 05 7 .5 12 7 2 .1 51 4 .2 15 6 2 .1 96 7 2 .2 73 2 2 .1 08 9 ð.1 98 5Þ ð.1 86 2Þ ð.1 71 9Þ ð.3 61 7Þ ð.3 82 8Þ ð9 6 .
86 42 Þ ð.2 09 0Þ ð.2 20 1Þ ð.2 48 1Þ M at h em at ic s_ 12 .0 09 2 .0 05 2 .0 04 3 2 .0 05 7 .0 16 0 .0 03 9 .0 07 2 .0 10 9 .0 05 2 ð.0 06 7Þ ð.0 06 3Þ ð.0 05 8Þ ð.0 12 2Þ ð.0 12 7Þ ð3 .0 68 8Þ ð.0 07 1Þ ð.0 07 5Þ ð.0 08 4Þ M at h em at ic s_ 2 .2 80 5 .0 89 8 .0 59 8 .0 66 9 .0 10 9 .2 95 5 .0 42 5 .1 68 1 .0 58 3 ð.1 93 7Þ ð.2 11 3Þ ð.2 16 4Þ ð.3 42 8Þ ð.3 80 8Þ ð8 5 .
20 75 Þ ð.2 42 9Þ ð.2 79 6Þ ð.2 89 7Þ M at h em at ic s_ 22 2 .0 05 7 .0 00 6 .0 01 2 .0 04 3 .0 09 7 2 .0 00 8 .0 00 0 2 .0 04 0 2 .0 01 8 ð.0 06 4Þ ð.0 06 8Þ ð.0 07 0Þ ð.0 11 6Þ ð.0 12 4Þ ð2 .7 23 3Þ ð.0 08 0Þ ð.0 09 1Þ ð.0 09 4Þ P re p sc h o o l fi xe d ef fe ct s Y es Y es Y es Y es Y es Y es Y es Y es Y es O b se rv at io n s 1 , 36 6 1 , 36 6 1 , 36 6 P se u d o -R 2 .1 97 7 .2 03 9 .2 20 0 .1 70 6 .1 74 8 .1 87 2 .1 80 5 .1 81 8 .1 96 7 N O T E .— T h is ta b le p re se n ts si m u lt an eo u s q u an ti le re gr es si o n m o d el s fo r th e 25 th ,5 0t h , a n d 75 th p er ce n ti le s , w h er e th e d ep en d en t va ri ab le is th e w ei gh te d av er ag e o f o ra l ex am gr ad es , w it h su b je ct w ei gh ts as in ta b le 1 .
In d ic at o r va ri ab le s ar e p re ce d ed b y th e p re fi x D _ .
T h e re gr es si o n m o d el in cl u d es p re p sc h o o l fi xe d ef fe ct s ðn o t re p o rt ed Þ .
B o o ts tr ap st an d ar d er ro rs ar e o b ta in ed w it h 5 , 00 0 re p li ca ti o n s. * p < .1 0 .
** p < .0 5 .
** * p < .0 1 .
485 T ab le 10 Pe rf or m an ce in th e B ac ca la u ré at : L in ea r P ro b ab il it y M o d el s A t L ea st C u m L au d e ð1 Þ A t L ea st M ag n a C u m L au d e ð2 Þ A t L ea st Su m m a C u m L au d e ð3 Þ A t L ea st C u m L au d e ð4 Þ A t L ea st M ag n a C u m L au d e ð5 Þ A t L ea st Su m m a C u m L au d e ð6 Þ C o n st an t .9 06 2* ** .8 59 3* ** .6 14 7* ** .9 33 8* ** .9 15 4* ** .8 55 0* ** ð.0 25 0Þ ð.0 36 2Þ ð.0 88 6Þ ð.0 41 4Þ ð.0 48 6Þ ð.1 01 2Þ D _ 20 06 .0 18 4* * .0 27 4* * .0 94 7* ** .0 17 0* * .0 21 6* * .0 59 2* ** ð.0 08 1Þ ð.0 10 9Þ ð.0 25 3Þ ð.0 07 5Þ ð.0 09 0Þ ð.0 17 5Þ D _ 20 07 .0 11 5 .0 19 1* .0 63 6* * .0 15 8* * .0 21 9* * .0 45 4* * ð.0 08 2Þ ð.0 11 1Þ ð.0 25 9Þ ð.0 07 6Þ ð.0 09 3Þ ð.0 19 0Þ D _ fe m al e .0 50 3* ** .0 78 2* ** .2 12 9* ** .0 32 8* ** .0 49 6* ** .1 03 4* ** ð.0 06 4Þ ð.0 08 8Þ ð.0 20 3Þ ð.0 06 0Þ ð.0 07 4Þ ð.0 15 0Þ D _ n o n -F re n ch 2 .0 16 3 2 .0 30 4 2 .1 23 7* ** .0 13 4 .0 01 8 2 .0 31 2 ð.0 13 2Þ ð.0 18 6Þ ð.0 46 7Þ ð.0 14 5Þ ð.0 16 4Þ ð.0 29 8Þ D _ m at h em at ic s_ su b m aj o r 2 .0 01 4 .0 03 3 .0 10 9 2 .0 08 0 2 .0 00 7 2 .0 25 8 ð.0 24 4Þ ð.0 35 6Þ ð.0 86 9Þ ð.0 23 2Þ ð.0 29 9Þ ð.0 71 5Þ D _ p h y si cs _ an d _ ch em is tr y _ su b m aj o r 2 .0 10 2 2 .0 12 6 2 .0 41 2 .0 09 9 .0 22 9 2 .0 11 1 ð.0 25 6Þ ð.0 37 1Þ ð.0 90 6Þ ð.0 24 2Þ ð.0 31 4Þ ð.0 73 9Þ D _ li fe _ sc ie n ce s_ su b m aj o r 2 .0 05 6 2 .0 04 5 .0 05 4 .0 04 8 .0 09 7 .0 45 6 ð.0 25 9Þ ð.0 37 4Þ ð.0 90 4Þ ð.0 24 2Þ ð.0 31 1Þ ð.0 74 4Þ P re p sc h o o l fi xe d ef fe ct s N o N o N o Y es Y es Y es O b se rv at io n s 5 , 63 5 4 , 14 0 1 , 62 1 5 , 63 5 4 , 14 0 1 , 62 1 A d ju st ed R 2 .0 10 5 .0 19 9 .0 74 2 .1 64 7 .3 38 2 .6 03 7 F -s ta ti st ic 9 .
56 ** * 12 .9 8* ** 19 .5 6* ** 10 .4 2* ** 19 .3 9* ** 24 .9 6* ** N O T E .— T h is ta b le p re se n ts li n ea r p ro b ab il it y m o d el es ti m at es fo r th e p ro b ab il it y o f o b ta in in g th e b ac ca la u ré at w it h at le as t a ce rt ai n le ve lo f h o n o rs .I n co ls .1 an d 4 th e d ep en d en t va ri ab le is eq u al to o n e if th e st u d en t h as o b ta in ed th e b ac ca la u ré at d ip lo m a w it h at le as t cu m la u d e ði .
e. , w it h cu m la u d e , m ag n a cu m la u d e , o r su m m a cu m la u d eÞ o r ze ro if th e st u d en t o b ta in ed th e h ig h sc h o o ld ip lo m a w it h a si m p le p as s ðn o h o n o rs Þ.I n co ls .2 an d 5 th e d ep en d en t va ri ab le is eq u al to o n e if th e st u d en t h as o b ta in ed th e b ac ca la u ré at d ip lo m a w it h at le as t m ag n a cu m la u d e ði .
e. , w it h m ag n a cu m la u d e o r su m m a cu m la u d eÞ o r ze ro if th e st u d en t o b ta in ed th e h ig h sc h o o l d ip lo m a w it h a si m p le p as s ðn o h o n o rs Þ ; th o se w h o o b ta in ed cu m la u d e ar e ex cl u d ed .
In co ls .3 an d 6 th e d ep en d en t va ri ab le ðat le as t su m m a cu m la u d eÞ is eq u al to o n e if th e st u d en t h as o b ta in ed th e b ac ca la u ré at d ip lo m a w it h at le as t su m m a cu m la u d e o r ze ro if th e st u d en t o b ta in ed th e h ig h sc h o o ld ip lo m a w it h a si m p le p as s ðn o h o n o rs Þ ; t h o se w h o h av e o b ta in ed cu m la u d e o r m ag n a cu m la u d e ar e ex cl u d ed .L in ea r p ro b ab il it y m o d el s in co ls .4 –6 in cl u d e p re p sc h o o lfi xe d ef fe ct s. H et er o sk ed as ti ci ty -c o n si st en t ði .
e. , r o b u st Þs ta n d ar d er ro rs ar e re p o rt ed w it h in p ar en th es es b el o w th e co ef fi ci en t es ti m at es .
* p < .1 0 .
** p < .0 5 .
** * p < .0 1 .
In alternative linear regression models , presented in columns 4–6 of ta- ble 10 , we reestimate the same set of linear probability models after in- cluding fixed effects for prep schools , which allow us control for the can- didates ’ unobservable academic characteristics , albeit in an indirect way .
The admission decisions of prep schools are based on candidates ’ academic qualities ðthrough grades and high school professors ’ appreciations as re- flected in grade bulletins and reference lettersÞ that are unobservable to us : prep schools vary in the degree of selectiveness in their admission pro- cess , with the best ones admitting the best high school seniors .
Moreover , these institutions make their admission decisions before the candidates pass their baccalauréat exams .
As a result , introducing prep school fixed effects allows us to better control for candidates ’ unobservable characteristics ðas revealed by these institutions ’ admission decisionsÞ as of the date of the bac- calauréat exam , albeit at the prep school level .
The results presented in columns 4–6 of table 10 are very similar to those of columns 1–3 .
We observe that after we control for the unobservable academic qualities that lead to prep school admission decisions , female candidates have a higher relative probability of obtaining their baccalauréat with honors .
In columns 4–6 of table 10 , D_female coefficient estimates corresponding to at least cum laude , at least magna cum laude , or at least summa cum laude honors are equal to 0.0328 , 0.0496 , and 0.1034 , respec- tively ðall are statistically significant at the 1 % levelÞ .
Finally , given the differences in the proportion of female candidates in different subsamples in table 3 , we reestimate table 10 regressions sepa- rately for the subsample that majored in mathematics ðapp .
table A8Þ and the subsample that majored in physics and chemistry or life sciences ðapp .
table A9Þ .
The results of these subsample regressions are very similar to those presented in table 10 .
We conclude that female candidates , whose performances were below those of males in the very competitive HEC en- trance exam , did significantly better than the same males 2 years prior in a series of noncompetitive exams .
In thefinal part of ourmultivariate analysis , we examine the performance of the admitted during the first year of the HEC grande école program .
Univariate tests presented in table 5 using core course letter grades suggest that females ’ performance dominates that of males in an FOSD sense when we combine all letter grades .
To revisit these results , first , we regress stu- dents ’ GPA , which is based on 11 core courses they have to take , on all the observable characteristics of the admitted .
Similarly to our analysis of thewritten and oral stages of theHECentrance exam , we also reestimate the first-year regressions using a GPA based on the five mathematics- oriented courses and another GPA based on the six nonmathematics- oriented subjects .
TheseGPAs are calculated using course letter grades and respective ECTS credit hours.44 44 Accounting , economics , finance , marketing , law , theory of organizations , and supply chain courses are worth 5 ECTS credits each ; statistics and quantitative Performance Gender Gap 487 Before commenting on the GPA regression results , we note that , in a multivariate setting , we do not expect to find any differences in perfor- mance between males and females during the first-year core courses for two reasons .
First , this is a group of highly talented students who excelled in the baccalauréat , who were typically admitted to the best prep schools , and who survived the competitive HEC entrance exam .
We have no a pri- ori reason to believe that any differences in performance across genders would remain for such a group of highly competitive and ex post successful individuals .
Second , despite the above-mentioned FOSD test results pre- sented in table 5 , in the first-year performance regressions we are including “ everything but the kitchen sink , ” which allows us to control for all the ob- servable student characteristics .
When we examine the first-year GPA ðcol .
1 of table 11Þ , the coefficient estimate forD_female is positive and equal to 0.0342 but is not statistically significant.We also findno effectwhen examiningGPAof themathematics- oriented classes ðcol .
2Þ : the coefficient estimate for D_female is equal to 20.1118 but is not statistically significant .
Nevertheless , when we run the GPA regression for the nonmathematics-oriented classes , we find a coef- ficient estimate of 0.1521 , which is statistically significant at the 5 % level ðcol .
3Þ .
Sowe have some evidence that women do better thanmenwhenwe examine the first-year GPAs , albeit for nonmathematics-oriented courses alone .
However , the first-year GPA regressions may not be precise enough .
First , the GPA is an ECTS credit weighted-average performance metric in which professor or course-specific grade distribution differences can not be accounted for .
Second , the number of observations with which GPA regressions can be run is somewhat limited : we have 457 students , but these have obtained a total of 5,046 letter grades .
Given this , we run similar regressions using the individual first-year core course letter grade as the dependent variable , after including separate time-varying professor and course fixed effects to the existing prep school fixed effects .
Given that we use all the core course letter grades obtained by an individual , we cluster the standard errors at the student level .
Results are reported in table 11 , columns 4–6 .
In column 4 , where we consider all individual course grades , the coefficient estimate for D_female is equal to 0.0420 , which is statistically insignificant .
In column 5 , the correspond- ing coefficient estimate based on the mathematics-oriented course grades is equal to20.0942 , which is not statistically significant either .
TheD_female coefficient estimate in column 6 in the regression for the nonmathematics- methods 2.5 ECTS credits each ; and modeling with Excel and English as a first foreign language 2 ECTS credits each , for a total of 44 ECTS credits for the 11 man- datory courses .
We exclude the first-year elective courses ðworth 16 ECTS creditsÞ since students differ in their elective course choices , and we would like to have a common performance metric .
488 Ors et al .
oriented course grades is equal to 0.1506 and is statistically significant at the 5 % level .
We note that the GPA and course grade regressions yield D_female coefficient estimates that are similar in size and statistical signifi- cance , even though GPAs are weighted by ECTS credit hours whereas the individual letter grades are not.We interpret these results , which are limited to nonmathematics-oriented courses , as weak evidence of higher perfor- mance by women in the first year at HEC.Wewould like to stress that our prior was to find no systematic performance difference among this highly competitive group of students admitted to the school .
Finally , wealsore- visit the regression models of table 11 with the subsamples ’ mathematics submajors as well as physics and chemistry and life sciences submajors in high school .
The results are presented in appendix table A10 : the coef- ficient estimate for D_female is not statistically significant except for the letter grade regression for the physics and chemistry or life sciences submajors , for which it is negative but statistically significant only at the 10 % level .
VI .
Discussion In this section , we revisit our findings within the context of the related literature on performance differences across genders .
We have shown that in the setting of a tournament-like real-world academic selection pro- cess ðthe HEC entrance examÞ , where payoffs at stake are large and eco- nomically important , women tend to do worse than men , while they per- form as well as or better than the same men in academic evaluations where competition is either absent or less intensive .
The findings of the univariate tests are corroborated in multivariate regressions in which we control for all the observable characteristics that are available to us as of the date of the said evaluation.We find that , typically , the right tail of the performance distributions is significantly fatter formen than forwomen.Given that only 380 candidates are admitted to the school , this results in more men being admitted to the top French business school than women .
A .
Potential Differences in Innate Ability The easiest ðbut , in our opinion , erroneousÞ conclusion one could draw by focusing on the data obtained from the HEC entrance examination is that men are more skilled than women .
For such an explanation to hold , we should observe systematically lower performance for females in the three academic evaluations taken by the same individuals .
Evidence pro- vided in Section V shows that this is not the case .
For the same cohort of students , women ’ s performance is higher during the baccalauréat , which is a noncompetitive exam ðin the sense that the success of one student does not hinder another student ’ s attainment of the degree during the baccalau- réatÞ .
For the admitted , during the first year of HEC , which is less com- petitive than the entrance exam ðin the sense that the ex ante failure prob- abilities given theHEC-suggested grade distributions as well as the ex post Performance Gender Gap 489 T ab le 11 Pe rf or m an ce in th e Fi rs t- Y ea r H E C C or e C ou rs es G ra d e P o in t A ve ra ge ðo u t o f 4 .
00 Þi n F ir st -Y ea r C o re C o u rs es at H E C L et te r G ra d es ðo u t o f 4 .
00 Þi n F ir st -Y ea r C o re C o u rs es at H E C G P A ð1 Þ G P A fo r M at h - O ri en te d C o u rs es ð2 Þ G P A fo r N o n m at h - O ri en te d C o u rs es ð3 Þ L et te r G ra d es ð4 Þ L et te r G ra d es fo r M at h - O ri en te d C o u rs es ð5 Þ L et te r G ra d es fo r N o n m at h - O ri en te d C o u rs es ð6 Þ C o n st an t 2 1 .
01 50 2 1 .
39 55 2 .7 81 9 .2 58 0 2 .7 18 0 .7 13 2 ð1 .6 89 0Þ ð2 .1 15 7Þ ð1 .7 47 9Þ ð1 .4 51 6Þ ð1 .7 07 1Þ ð1 .5 36 9Þ D _ 20 06 2 .1 56 4* * 2 .1 55 7* 2 .1 72 0* ** 2 .8 17 2* ** 2 .3 52 2 2 .5 11 9* * ð.0 63 5Þ ð.0 79 5Þ ð.0 65 7Þ ð.2 65 9Þ ð.2 27 3Þ ð.2 15 1Þ D _ fe m al e .0 34 2 2 .1 11 8 .1 52 1* * .0 42 0 2 .0 94 2 .1 50 6* ** ð.0 60 1Þ ð.0 75 2Þ ð.0 62 1Þ ð.0 49 8Þ ð.0 60 8Þ ð.0 53 8Þ D _ n o n -F re n ch 2 .0 66 9 .0 74 9 2 .2 10 2 2 .0 44 1 .0 14 6 2 .1 48 1 ð.1 31 5Þ ð.1 64 7Þ ð.1 36 0Þ ð.1 16 8Þ ð.1 38 1Þ ð.1 26 5Þ D _ m at h em at ic s_ su b m aj o r 2 .1 80 5 2 .1 58 6 2 .2 02 2 2 .2 61 2 2 .2 81 2 2 .2 29 6 ð.2 26 1Þ ð.2 83 2Þ ð.2 34 0Þ ð.2 18 5Þ ð.2 18 7Þ ð.2 39 7Þ D _ p h y si cs _ an d _ ch em is tr y _ su b m aj o r 2 .2 42 4 2 .2 89 7 2 .1 97 3 2 .2 97 6 2 .3 75 9 2 .2 52 2 ð.2 43 4Þ ð.3 04 8Þ ð.2 51 8Þ ð.2 35 2Þ ð.2 42 5Þ ð.2 56 4Þ D _ li fe _ sc ie n ce s_ su b m aj o r 2 .1 60 2 2 .1 25 8 2 .2 00 2 2 .2 50 6 2 .2 38 1 2 .2 39 3 ð.2 45 4Þ ð.3 07 5Þ ð.2 54 0Þ ð.2 39 3Þ ð.2 46 5Þ ð.2 61 7Þ D _ cu m _ la u d e .1 11 1 .0 68 7 .1 28 3 .0 82 3 .1 20 5 .0 23 3 ð.2 48 1Þ ð.3 10 7Þ ð.2 56 7Þ ð.2 00 2Þ ð.2 89 2Þ ð.2 01 0Þ D _ m ag n a_ cu m _ la u d e .2 24 2 .1 91 7 .2 36 0 .2 25 9 .2 33 6 .1 93 7 ð.2 33 6Þ ð.2 92 6Þ ð.2 41 8Þ ð.1 91 2Þ ð.2 75 7Þ ð.1 89 9Þ D _ su m m a_ cu m _ la u d e .4 64 5* .4 23 8 .4 76 7* .4 34 4* * .4 61 3 .3 94 4* * ð.2 40 3Þ ð.3 01 0Þ ð.2 48 7Þ ð.2 01 0Þ ð.2 87 2Þ ð.1 99 7Þ 1s t_ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e ðw ri tt en Þ 2 .2 63 5* * 2 .2 66 0* 2 .2 69 4* * 2 .2 36 5* * 2 .1 89 2* 2 .2 96 6* ** ð.1 17 6Þ ð.1 47 3Þ ð.1 21 7Þ ð.0 99 4Þ ð.1 14 7Þ ð.1 07 9Þ 1s t_ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e2 ðw ri tt en Þ .0 09 8* * .0 09 9* .0 10 0* * .0 08 8* * .0 07 1* .0 11 2* ** ð.0 04 3Þ ð.0 05 4Þ ð.0 04 5Þ ð.0 03 7Þ ð.0 04 3Þ ð.0 04 1Þ 2n d _ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e ðw ri tt en Þ .0 29 2 .0 35 2 .0 20 5 .0 55 4 .0 32 3 .0 52 5 ð.1 10 3Þ ð.1 38 2Þ ð.1 14 2Þ ð.1 05 2Þ ð.1 24 3Þ ð.1 05 2Þ 490 G ra d e P o in t A ve ra ge ðo u t o f 4 .
00 Þi n F ir st -Y ea r C o re C o u rs es at H E C L et te r G ra d es ðo u t o f 4 .
00 Þi n F ir st - Y ea r C o re C o u rs es at H E C 2n d _ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e2 ðw ri tt en Þ .0 00 3 .0 00 7 .0 00 2 2 .0 00 7 .0 00 6 2 .0 01 0 ð.0 04 4Þ ð.0 05 5Þ ð.0 04 5Þ ð.0 04 1Þ ð.0 04 8Þ ð.0 04 2Þ F re n ch ðw ri tt en Þ .0 16 7 2 .0 77 6 .0 89 8 .0 07 0 2 .0 58 8 .0 62 3 ð.0 54 1Þ ð.0 67 7Þ ð.0 55 9Þ ð.0 45 4Þ ð.0 54 2Þ ð.0 49 8Þ F re n ch 2 ðw ri tt en Þ 2 .0 00 6 .0 03 0 2 .0 03 4 2 .0 00 3 .0 02 1 2 .0 02 4 ð.0 02 2Þ ð.0 02 8Þ ð.0 02 3Þ ð.0 01 9Þ ð.0 02 3Þ ð.0 02 0Þ G en er al _ cu lt u re ðw ri tt en Þ .0 40 4 .0 43 9 .0 37 6 .0 27 0 .0 32 7 .0 22 6 ð.0 51 8Þ ð.0 64 9Þ ð.0 53 6Þ ð.0 49 7Þ ð.0 59 6Þ ð.0 51 4Þ G en er al _ cu lt u re 2 ðw ri tt en Þ 2 .0 01 0 2 .0 00 8 2 .0 01 1 2 .0 00 4 2 .0 00 5 2 .0 00 4 ð.0 02 1Þ ð.0 02 7Þ ð.0 02 2Þ ð.0 02 1Þ ð.0 02 5Þ ð.0 02 1Þ H is to ry _ an d _ ge o gr ap h y ðw ri tt en Þ .0 89 8 .1 04 4 .0 80 2 .0 92 1* .0 94 9 .0 85 8 ð.0 56 4Þ ð.0 70 6Þ ð.0 58 3Þ ð.0 54 1Þ ð.0 62 5Þ ð.0 57 7Þ H is to ry _ an d _ ge o gr ap h y 2 ðw ri tt en Þ 2 .0 02 9 2 .0 03 1 2 .0 02 8 2 .0 03 0 2 .0 03 0 2 .0 02 9 ð.0 02 2Þ ð.0 02 7Þ ð.0 02 3Þ ð.0 02 1Þ ð.0 02 4Þ ð.0 02 2Þ M at h em at ic s_ 1 ðw ri tt en Þ 2 .0 04 3 .0 18 9 2 .0 21 0 .0 08 8 .0 30 3 2 .0 25 5 ð.0 76 9Þ ð.0 96 3Þ ð.0 79 6Þ ð.0 74 3Þ ð.0 89 2Þ ð.0 78 0Þ M at h em at ic s_ 12 ðw ri tt en Þ .0 00 7 .0 00 6 .0 00 7 .0 00 4 .0 00 2 .0 01 0 ð.0 02 5Þ ð.0 03 2Þ ð.0 02 6Þ ð.0 02 4Þ ð.0 02 9Þ ð.0 02 5Þ M at h em at ic s_ 2 ðw ri tt en Þ .1 64 5 .1 36 2 .1 95 6* .1 35 9 .1 12 9 .1 46 8* ð.1 02 6Þ ð.1 28 6Þ ð.1 06 2Þ ð.0 85 9Þ ð.1 13 3Þ ð.0 85 5Þ M at h em at ic s_ 22 ðw ri tt en Þ 2 .0 04 4 2 .0 03 0 2 .0 05 7* 2 .0 03 5 2 .0 02 4 2 .0 04 2 ð.0 03 2Þ ð.0 04 0Þ ð.0 03 3Þ ð.0 02 7Þ ð.0 03 5Þ ð.0 02 7Þ 1s t_ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e ðo ra lÞ 2 .0 01 3 2 .0 20 9 .0 28 6 .0 04 7 2 .0 25 1 .0 30 3 ð.0 57 4Þ ð.0 72 0Þ ð.0 59 4Þ ð.0 49 3Þ ð.0 61 6Þ ð.0 51 1Þ 1s t_ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e2 ðo ra lÞ .0 00 5 .0 01 2 2 .0 00 7 2 .0 00 0 .0 01 3 2 .0 01 0 ð.0 02 1Þ ð.0 02 7Þ ð.0 02 2Þ ð.0 01 8Þ ð.0 02 3Þ ð.0 01 9Þ 2n d _ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e ðo ra lÞ .0 19 7 2 .0 23 5 .0 63 1 .0 04 2 2 .0 34 6 .0 50 3 ð.0 70 1Þ ð.0 87 8Þ ð.0 72 6Þ ð.0 65 2Þ ð.0 72 0Þ ð.0 75 3Þ 2n d _ fo re ig n _ la n gu ag e2 ðo ra lÞ 2 .0 00 7 .0 01 1 2 .0 02 6 2 .0 00 3 .0 01 5 2 .0 02 2 ð.0 02 5Þ ð.0 03 2Þ ð.0 02 6Þ ð.0 02 4Þ ð.0 02 7Þ ð.0 02 7Þ D eb at e ðo ra lÞ .0 15 8 .0 10 9 .0 21 4 2 .0 21 1 2 .0 39 3 2 .0 07 7 ð.0 78 0Þ ð.0 97 7Þ ð.0 80 7Þ ð.0 60 1Þ ð.0 73 1Þ ð.0 61 5Þ D eb at e2 ðo ra lÞ 2 .0 01 1 2 .0 00 6 2 .0 01 6 .0 00 7 .0 01 8 2 .0 00 1 ð.0 03 3Þ ð.0 04 1Þ ð.0 03 4Þ ð.0 02 6Þ ð.0 03 2Þ ð.0 02 6Þ 491 T ab le 11 ( C on ti n u ed ) G ra d e P o in t A ve ra ge ðo u t o f 4 .
00 Þi n F ir st -Y ea r C o re C o u rs es at H E C L et te r G ra d es ðo u t o f 4 .
00 Þi n F ir st -Y ea r C o re C o u rs es at H E C G P A ð1 Þ G P A fo r M at h - O ri en te d C o u rs es ð2 Þ G P A fo r N o n m at h - O ri en te d C o u rs es ð3 Þ L et te r G ra d es ð4 Þ L et te r G ra d es fo r M at h - O ri en te d C o u rs es ð5 Þ L et te r G ra d es fo r N o n m at h - O ri en te d C o u rs es ð6 Þ G en er al _ cu lt u re ðo ra lÞ .0 25 6 .0 29 6 .0 19 9 .0 27 1 .0 22 7 .0 28 2 ð.0 41 3Þ ð.0 51 7Þ ð.0 42 7Þ ð.0 37 1Þ ð.0 43 2Þ ð.0 38 9Þ G en er al _ cu lt u re 2 ðo ra lÞ 2 .0 01 2 2 .0 01 4 2 .0 01 0 2 .0 01 4 2 .0 01 2 2 .0 01 3 ð.0 02 1Þ ð.0 02 6Þ ð.0 02 1Þ ð.0 01 9Þ ð.0 02 2Þ ð.0 01 9Þ H is to ry _ an d _ ge o gr ap h y ðo ra lÞ .0 44 4 .0 82 6* * .0 13 0 .0 42 0 .0 69 1* * .0 21 7 ð.0 29 6Þ ð.0 37 1Þ ð.0 30 7Þ ð.0 27 9Þ ð.0 33 0Þ ð.0 30 3Þ H is to ry _ an d _ ge o gr ap h y 2 ðo ra lÞ 2 .0 01 4 2 .0 03 1* * .0 00 0 2 .0 01 5 2 .0 02 8* * 2 .0 00 6 ð.0 01 2Þ ð.0 01 6Þ ð.0 01 3Þ ð.0 01 2Þ ð.0 01 4Þ ð.0 01 3Þ M at h em at ic s ðo ra lÞ .0 42 2 .0 61 0 .0 26 6 .0 24 9 .0 47 9 .0 12 4 ð.0 46 0Þ ð.0 57 6Þ ð.0 47 6Þ ð.0 40 0Þ ð.0 51 2Þ ð.0 41 1Þ M at h em at ic s2 ðo ra lÞ 2 .0 00 5 2 .0 00 6 2 .0 00 5 .0 00 2 2 .0 00 1 .0 00 3 ð.0 01 9Þ ð.0 02 4Þ ð.0 02 0Þ ð.0 01 7Þ ð.0 02 1Þ ð.0 01 7Þ F ix ed ef fe ct s : P re p sc h o o l Y es Y es Y es Y es Y es Y es P ro fe ss o r D _ 20 06 N o N o N o Y es Y es Y es C o u rs e D _ 20 06 N o N o N o Y es Y es Y es O b se rv at io n s 45 7 45 7 45 7 5 , 02 4 2 , 30 0 2 , 72 4 C lu st er ed st an d ar d er ro rs N o N o N o Y es Y es Y es A d ju st ed R 2 .2 62 4 .2 82 7 .2 12 3 .2 94 5 .3 01 4 .3 30 9 R eg re ss io n F -s ta ti st ic 3 .
13 ** * 3 .
36 ** * 2 .
62 ** * N O T E .— T h is ta b le p re se n ts ðiÞ p o o le d O L S re gr es si o n s in w h ic h th e d ep en d en t va ri ab le is H E C fi rs t- y ea r G P A in co re co u rs es ðco ls .1 –3 Þa n d ðii Þi n d iv id u al le tt er gr ad es in co re co u rs es ðco ls .4 –6 Þ.A ll re gr es si o n s ar e w it h p re p sc h o o lfi xe d ef fe ct s ðfo r w h ic h th e co ef fi ci en t es ti m at es ar e n o t re p o rt ed Þ. “ E ve ry th in g b u t th e k it ch en si n k ” re gr es si o n s ðco ls .4 –6 Þ w it h le tt er gr ad es as th e d ep en d en t va ri ab le al so in cl u d e ti m e- va ry in g p ro fe ss o r an d ti m e- va ry in g co u rs e fi xe d ef fe ct s ðfo r w h ic h th e co ef fi ci en t es ti m at es ar e n o t re p o rt ed Þ.S ta n d ar d er ro rs ar e re p o rt ed w it h in p ar en th es es b el o w co ef fi ci en t es ti m at es .
In co ls .
4 –6 , h et er o sk ed as ti ci ty -c o n si st en t st an d ar d er ro rs ar e cl u st er ed at th e st u d en t le ve l. * p < .1 0 .
** p < .0 5 .
** * p < .0 1. class failures are very lowÞ , we also find , albeit weaker , evidence that fe- male students do better thanmale students.We also would like to note that there are similarities in content that are important , allowing us to focus on the differences in the level of competition .
For example , during the science track baccalauréat exam , similarly to the HEC admission process , students have to take written exams that include French literature ðboth written and oralÞ , mathematics , history , geography , philosophy , and foreign languages ðoralÞ.45 Hence , the comparison of the distributions of performances both at the baccalauréat exam and at theHEC admission contest provides a way of testing whether difference in ability is a possible explanation for the dif- ferences in performances observed at the HEC admission contest .
We ob- serve striking differences whenwe compare the results of tables 6–9 , where females underperform in the HEC entrance exam , with those of table 10 , where they outperform in the baccalauréat exam .
Importantly , this rever- sal of performances persists even when we reestimate the multivariate re- gression models for the different science submajors .
Moreover , when con- sidering themuch less competitiveHECfirst-year core courses ðwhere only 1 % of students obtain an FÞ , we observe that in multivariate “ everything but the kitchen sink ” regressions of individual letter grades , women who underperform during the entrance exam do better than the same men in nonmathematics-oriented classes once admitted to the school .
These find- ings therefore suggest that differences in innate abilities are unlikely to ex- plain the lower performance of females during the HEC entrance exam .
B .
Potential Differences in Mathematics Affinity The accumulating evidence indicates that males perform better in math- ematics inmore competitive settings ðseeNiederle andVesterlund ½2010 for a thorough review of this literatureÞ .
Our evidence indicates that some of the gender gap in performance that we observe may be driven by the higher mathematics affinity of males in our sample .
In both univariate tests and multivariate regressions , we observe that the males ’ ðfemales ’ Þ tendency to do better in mathematics or mathematics-related ðnonmathematics-relatedÞ subjects relative to females ðmalesÞ can be detected in our data .
This result is consistent with the results of Guiso et al .
ð2008Þ , who find that ðiÞ gender differences in mathematics performance are positively correlated with the World Economic ForumGender Gap Index and that ðiiÞ France scores low in that index .
This said , the differences of genders in mathematics affinity could not be said to be the main driver of our results .
First , women ’ s per- formance dominates that of men during the baccalauréat exam irrespective of the submajor , even in fields such as life sciences or physics and chemistry , where females make up a relatively higher fraction of the students .
Second , in the written stage of the entrance exam , women underperform men in 45 Science majors also have to sit for examinations in physics , chemistry , and life sciences ðbiology and geologyÞ during the baccalauréat ðsee table 12 belowÞ .
Performance Gender Gap 493 both mathematics and nonmathematics-related fields ðsee tables 7 and 8Þ .
Third , we would like to emphasize the fact that in the overall performance metrics ðthe dependent variable in table 6 and cols .
1–3 of table 9Þ , the weight of mathematics is 36.67 % in the written stage and 25 % in the oral stage ðmoreon this in Sec.VI.CbelowÞ .
If anything , givenmen ’ s apparently higher affinity formathematics andwomen ’ s apparently higher affinity for nonmathematics-related subjects , thewaymathematics are weighted in the entrance exam is likely to putmen at a disadvantage , potentially biasing the exam in favor of women .
That said , our results also indicate that , while we observe no difference in performance across genders when all courses to- gether or when mathematics-oriented first-year courses are considered , women appear to be doing better in nonmathematics-oriented classes once admitted to HEC .
C. Weights Associated with Mathematics-Oriented Fields in Performance Metrics Another possibility for the observed gender difference in performances is that the implicit weights involved in the calculation of the weighted- average grades in the three academic evaluations that we examine favor males during the entrance exam and females during the baccalauréat and first-year core courses at HEC .
This could be a plausible explanation given that we observe differences in the mathematics affinity of males and fe- males in our sample ðas reflected in the results reported in table 5 , table 7 vs. table 8 , as well as table 9Þ .
To explore this possibility , in tables 12 , 13 , and 14 , we provide detailed information about the weights given to each of the subject matters included in the three academic evaluations that we analyze .
In table 12 , we provideweights in the baccalauréat per science submajor .
For the mathematics and physics and chemistry submajors ðwhich form 87.45 % of our sampleÞ , the weights given to the fields that lend their names to them account for 37.5 % of the baccalauréat grade , with the remaining 62.5 % accounted for by the fields that we label as nonmathematics-oriented ðlife sciences , French , history and geography , first and second foreign ½or a regional language , philosophy , and physical educationÞ.46 In contrast , the weight of mathematics during the written part of the entrance exam is a slightly lower 36.67 % ðtable 13Þ .
If anything , the slightly higher weight given to mathematics-oriented fields during the baccalauréat should favor men ’ s performance .
However , we observe the opposite .
The slightly lower weights for mathematics and physics and chemistry for the life sciences submajors , which form 12.55 % of our sample , are unlikely to explain the differences we observe between tables 6 ðwritten exam regressionsÞ and 10 46 We choose not to classify the life sciences ðbiology and geologyÞ submajor and exams as mathematics oriented , something that is potentially open to debate , so as not to “ inflate ” mathematics-oriented fields ’ weights in the baccalauréat .
494 Ors et al .
T ab le 12 Su bj ec t W ei gh ts in th e B ac ca la u ré at E x am M at h em at ic s Su b m aj o r ð7 0 .
30 % o f th e Sa m p le Þ P h y si cs an d C h em is tr y Su b m aj o r ð1 5 .
25 % o f th e Sa m p le Þ L if e Sc ie n ce s Su b m aj o r ð1 2 .
55 % o f th e Sa m p le Þ Sc ie n ce M aj o rs C o ef fi ci en t W ei gh t ð % Þ C o ef fi ci en t W ei gh t ð % Þ C o ef fi ci en t W ei gh t ð % Þ M at h em at ic s 9 7 7 P h y si cs an d ch em is tr y 6 8 6 M at h -o ri en te d fi el d s ’ su b to ta l 15 37 .5 15 37 .5 13 32 .5 L if e sc ie n ce s ðb io lo gy an d ge o lo gy Þ 6 6 8 F re n ch 6 6 6 H is to ry an d ge o gr ap h y 3 3 3 1s t fo re ig n la n gu ag e 3 3 3 2n d fo re ig n /r eg io n al la n gu ag e 2 2 2 P h il o so p h y 3 3 3 P h y si ca l ed u ca ti o n ðsp o rt sÞ 2 2 2 O th er fi el d s ’ su b to ta l 25 62 .5 25 62 .5 27 67 .5 T o ta l 40 10 0 .
0 40 10 0 .
0 40 10 0 .
0 or 11 ðbaccalauréat regressionsÞ .
In fact , as mentioned before , females ’ higher performance during the baccalauréat persists when we examine the mathematics submajors ðsee app .
tables A8 and A9Þ .
D. Alternative Explanations One potential explanation for the observed difference in performance across genders is risk aversion .
As detailed in the literature surveys of Eckel and Grossman ð2008Þ and Croson and Gneezy ð2009Þ , the findings of the experimental studies indicate that women tend to be more risk Table 14 Subject Weights in the HEC First-Year Courses ECTS Credits Weight ð % Þ Economics 5 11.36 Finance 5 11.36 Quantitative methods 2.5 5.68 Statistics 2.5 5.68 Supply chain 5 11.36 Math-oriented courses ’ subtotal 20 45.45 Accounting 5 11.36 English as a 1st foreign language 2 4.55 Business law 5 11.36 Marketing 5 11.36 Modeling with Excel 2 4.55 Theory of organizations 5 11.36 Nonmath-oriented courses ’ subtotal 24 54.55 Total 44 100.00 Table 13 Subject Weights in the HEC Entrance Exam Writen Exam Stage Oral Exam Stage Coefficient Weight ð % Þ Coefficient Weight ð % Þ Mathematics 1 6 9 Mathematics 2 5 Mathematics subtotal 11 36.67 9 25.00 French 3 1st foreign language 4 4 2nd foreign language 2 3 General culture 4 6 History and geography 6 8 Debate 6 Other fields ’ subtotal 19 63.33 27 75.00 Total 30 100.00 36 100.00 496 Ors et al .
averse than men in various settings .
Unfortunately , the data that are at our disposal do not allow us to construct a statistical test that would clearly indicate whether or not the observed differences in performance could be linked to differences in risk aversion across genders.47 E. Are Women Potentially Less Competitive than Men ?
As already mentioned , a striking result of our study is the reversal of the performance gender gap at the HEC admission exam ðan elimination-type tournamentÞ compared to the French baccalauréat ða pass-or-fail examÞ , even though the academic content of both exams is similar .
For the driver of these results to be women ’ s underperformance in relatively more com- petitive environments , we should observe , during the first year of HEC , a pattern that is similar to that of the baccalauréat .
As a matter of fact , this is what we observe , albeit only for the nonmathematics-oriented courses , when we look at the GPA or individual course letter grades in our “ ev- erything but the kitchen sink ” regressions presented in table 11 .
Note that many ðbut not allÞ courses at HEC are based on a curve system , whose resulting letter grade distribution could be a priori known by the students .
So , we do not claim that there is no competitive pressure duringHEC ’ s first year .
Instead we only suggest that once students are admitted to the school , this pressure is much lower than that prevailing during the school ’ s en- trance exam .
VII .
Conclusion Using a unique database , we analyze gender differences in performance in a two-round elimination-type tournament : the admission exams toHEC Paris ’ s MSc in Management .
Given that this program is ranked first in Europe in its category and given the important differences in salary upon graduation , payoffs at stake are very high for the candidates we examine .
We find that men perform better than women in this competitive exam despite the fact that , for the same cohorts of candidates , the women per- formed significantly better at an earlier pass/fail type of exam ðthe national baccalauréat examÞ and , once admitted , during the less competitive first year of their studies at HEC , though our evidence , which is limited to nonmathematics-oriented courses , is somewhat weaker in the latter case .
While during the entrance exam men perform better than women among the top 10 % of the applicant pool ði.e. , thosewho are eventually admitted to the schoolÞ , there is no statistically significant gender difference in perfor- mance as far as the bottom 10 % is concerned .
The general picture is then that of a larger dispersion of performances among men .
47 We do not , e.g. , have experimental data on objective probability lotteries or field data on gambles for the individuals who are in our data set so as to be able to test whether measures of risk aversion vary across genders .
Performance Gender Gap 497 Consistent with earlier experimental studies , our results , which are based on real-world data , indicate that the competitive aspect of the con- test may lead to differences in performance across genders .
This in turn has implications for the successful pool of candidates , which ends up contain- ing more males than females .
References Anderson , Gordon .
1996 .
Nonparametric tests of stochastic dominance in income distributions .
Econometrica 64 , no .
5:1183–93 .
Barrett , Garry F. , and Steven G. Donald .
2003 .
Consistent tests for sto- chastic dominance .
Econometrica 71 , no .
1:71–104 .
Beyer , Sylvia .
2002 .
The effect of gender , dysphoria , and performance feedback on the accuracy of self-evaluation .
Sex Roles 47 ðNovemberÞ : 453–564 .
Beyer , Sylvia , Michelle DeKeuster , Kristina Rynes , and Jennifer DeHeer .
2004 .
The temporal stability of gender differences in MIS students .
AMCIS 2004 Proceedings , paper 151 , http : //aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2004 /151 .
Beyer , Sylvia , Kristina Rynes , and Susan Haller .
2004 .
Deterrents to women taking computer science courses .
IEEE Society and Technology 23 ðSpringÞ : 21–28 .
Croson , R. , andUriGneezy .
2009 .
Gender differences in preferences .
Jour- nal of Economic Literature 47 , no .
2:448–74 .
Davidson , Russell , and Jean-Yves Duclos .
2000 .
Statistical inference for stochastic dominance and for the measurement of poverty and inequal- ity .
Econometrica 68 , no .
6:1435–64 .
Delfgaauw , Josse , Robert Dur , Joeri Sol , andWillem Verbeke .
2009 .
Tour- nament incentives in the field : Gender differences in the workplace .
Dis- cussion paper no .
4395 , Institute for the Study of Labor ðIZAÞ , Bonn .
Eckel , Catherine C. , and Philip Grossman .
2008 .
Men , women and risk aversion : Experimental evidence .
InHandbook of experimental econom- ics results , vol .
1 , ed .
Charles Plott and Vernon Smith , 1061–73 .
New York : Elsevier .
Economist .
2006 .
Lessons from the campus : In higher education , a free- for-all does not work .
October 26 .
Ge , Suqin .
2011.Women ’ s college decisions : Howmuch doesmarriagemat- ter ?
Journal of Labor Economics 29 , no .
4:773–818 .
Gneezy , Uri , Kenneth L. Leonard , and John A .
List .
2009 .
Gender dif- ferences in competition : Evidence from a matrilineal and a patriarchal society .
Econometrica 77 , no .
5:1637–64 .
Gneezy , Uri , Muriel Niederle , and Aldo Rustichini .
2003 .
Performance in competitive environments : Gender differences.Quarterly Journal of Eco- nomics 118 ðAugustÞ : 1049–74 .
498 Ors et al .
Goldin , Claudia , and Cecilia Rouse .
2000 .
Orchestrating impartiality : The impact of “ blind ” auditions on female musicians .
American Eco- nomic Review 90 , no .
4:715–41 .
Guiso , Luigi , Ferdinando Monte , Paola Sapienza , and Luigi Zingales .
2008 .
Culture , gender , and math .
Science 320 ðMay 30Þ : 1164–65 .
Jurajda , Stepan , and Daniel Munich .
2011 .
Gender gap in admission per- formance under competitive pressure .
American Economic Review Pa- pers and Proceedings 101 , no .
3:514–18 .
Kleinjans , Kristin .
2009 .
Do gender differences in preferences for compe- tition matter for occupational expectations ?
Journal of Economic Psy- chology 30 , no .
5:701–10 .
La Lettre de L ’ Etudiant .
2006 .
Classement des prépas commerciaux voie scientifique .
September 1 .
Lavy , Victor .
2008a .
Do gender stereotypes reduce girls ’ human capital outcomes ?
Evidence from a natural experiment .
Journal of Public Eco- nomics 92 , nos .
10–11:2083–2105 .
——— .
2008b .
Gender differences in market competitiveness in a real workplace : Evidence from performance-based pay tournaments among teachers .
Working paper no .
14338 , National Bureau of Economic Re- search , Cambridge , MA .
Le Monde .
2009 .
Les filles brillent en classe , les garçons aux concours .
September 8 .
——— .
2012 .
Prépas , l ’ excellence au prix fort .
February 3 .
Niederle , Muriel , and , Lise Vesterlund .
2007 .
Do women shy away from competition ?
Do men compete too much ?
Quarterly Journal of Eco- nomics 122 , no .
3:1067–1101 .
——— .
2010 .
Explaining the gender gap in math test scores : The role of competition .
Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 , no .
2:129–44 .
Paserman , M.Daniele .
2010 .
Gender differences in performance in compet- itive environments ?
Evidence from professional tennis players .
Work- ing paper , Boston University .
RERS ðRepères et Références Statistiques sur les Enseignements , la For- mation et la RechercheÞ .
2007 .
Annual report .
French Ministry of National Education and the Ministry of Higher Education and Re- search , Paris .
Siegel , Sidney , and N. John Castellan Jr. 1988.Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences .
2nd ed .
New York : McGraw-Hill .
Performance Gender Gap 499 Copyright of Journal of Labor Economics is the property of University of Chicago Press and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder 's express written permission .
However , users may print , download , or email articles for individual use .
