Pliskin_JournExpSocPsych_2015_JrB.pdf
ayJbWmucMy5bGGixAMEtGP_oc7Ye-Pliskin_JournExpSocPsych_2015_JrB.pdf.plain.html

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 59 ( 2015 ) 90–95 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Experimental Social Psychology j ourna l homepage : www.e lsev ie r .com/ locate / j espRunning for your life , in context : Are rightists always less likely to consider fleeing their country when fearing future events ? Ruthie Pliskin a , b , Gal Sheppes a , Eran Halperin b , ⁎ a Tel Aviv University , P.O .
Box 39040 , Tel Aviv-Yaffa 6997801 , Israel b Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya , Kanfei Nesharim 167 , Herzliya 46150 , Israel H I G H L I G H T S • We examine how context and ideology moderate fear 's effect on flight intentions .
• Context , ideology and fear interactively affect willingness to consider flight .
• When ideology is irrelevant , fear increases only rightists ' flight intentions .
• In ideologically-relevant contexts , fear increases only leftists ' flight intentions.⁎ Corresponding author at : School of Psychology , Int Kanfei Nesharim 167 , Herzliya 46150 , Israel .
E-mail address : eran.halperin @ idc.ac.il ( E. Halperin ) .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2015.04.001 0022-1031/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.a b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f oArticle history : Received 8 November 2014 Revised 3 April 2015 Available online 11 April 2015 Keywords : Fear Ideology Context FlightFear is a powerful motivator for the classic fight or flight response .
Under extreme social and political circum- stances , fearmay lead people to emigrate from their land to protect themselves and their families.While ideology is related to differences in behavioral fear reactivity , little is known about how it moderates the effect of fear on flight intentions .
In a large experimental study ( N = 243 ) , we examined our hypothesis that this moderating effect is context-dependent , such that the context 's relation to the ideology determines its influence .
In ideologically-irrelevant contexts , because rightists ( versus leftists ) are assumed to bemore behaviorally reactive to fear , their willingness to consider flight should bemore affected .
In ideologically-relevant intergroup contexts , however , rightist ideology provides clear reaction guidelines ruling out flight , and therefore fear should have a weaker effect on rightists ' ( versus leftists ' ) flight tendencies .
Our findings supported these predictions , and their significance is discussed .
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Fear , a discrete aversive emotion , arises when an individual perceives a threat or danger towards himself or herself or his or her ingroup ( Gray , 1987 ; Öhman , 1993 ; Rachman , 1978 ) .
This emotion has long been recognized for its importance in political and other social contexts .
Classically , fear has been conceptualized as motivating “ fight or flight ” ( see Cannon , 1932 ) , meaning the tendency to either confront the fear-eliciting agent or escape from it .
Of these two routes , fear very often leads individuals to the latter , motivating highly avoidant behavior ( Frijda , Kuipers , & ter Schure , 1989 ) , an extreme form of which may be physical migration to another country .
Nonetheless , in many contexts , such as intergroup conflicts , leaving a country may stand at odds with one 's ingroup attachment and ideological convic- tions .
In this paper , we are interested in examining when fear of an impending threat to society may lead people to consider fleeing .
We argue that the effect of fear on flight intentions is ideology- anderdisciplinary Center Herzliya , context-dependent , such that political stance may have a different impact on the outcomes of fear in ideologically-irrelevant versus ideologically-relevant contexts .
We elaborate on this proposed differ- ence below .
Fear , collective fear , and flight reactions Associated with appraisals of high perceived threat coupled with low strength and control over the situation ( Roseman , 1984 ) , fear com- prises physiological and psychological reactions aimed at increasing survival capabilities in dangerous situations .
Behaviorally , it may lead to different , even contradictory , action tendencies—often termed “ fight or flight. ” This means that while fear may motivate confrontation with fear-inducing stimuli , it is frequently associated with avoidant action tendencies ( see Frijda et al. , 1989 ) .
In fact , when individuals have little ability to alter the fear-eliciting situation through a “ fight ” reaction , “ flight ” may become the dominant behavior .
One context in which individuals may not be able to deal with fear- eliciting events by individually confronting them is the collective 91R .
Pliskin et al .
/ Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 59 ( 2015 ) 90–95context , in which events are often beyond the personal control of individuals .
Studies show that in such contexts , experiences of threat and fear lead to increased support for risk-aversive and defensive polit- ical policies ( e.g. , Halperin , 2011 ; Lerner , Gonzalez , Small , & Fischhoff , 2003 ) , decreased support for confrontational policies ( e.g. , Huddy , Feldman , Taber , & Lahav , 2005 ; Skitka , Bauman , Aramovich , & Morgan , 2006 ) , and increased motivation to avoid a threatening outgroup ( e.g. , Pettigrew & Tropp , 2006 ; Skitka et al. , 2006 ) .
Furthermore , studies have shown that threats to the group lead to greater personal avoidance tendencies , with people reporting cancelling travel plans and avoiding mass transportation in light of fear ( e.g. , Huddy , Feldman , Capelos , & Provost , 2002 ) .
As stated above , because of limited individual influence over many collectively-relevant threats , one readily available option for personal action in such situations may be fleeing the area in which the threat is present .
In collective contexts in which threats are continuously or repeatedly present , flight may involve drastic measures and great costs—because to avoid the threatening context altogether the individ- ual would have to physically leave the area inhabited by the group , which is often a region of political significance such as a state .
In certain contexts , such as in themidst of intergroup conflicts , physical flightmay be viewed as socially illegitimate , exposing the individual to social criticism for not facing the threat together with fellow group members .
Indeed , individuals fleeing their countries in the wake of political conflict are often regarded as traitors , or given derogatory descriptions such as the one coined by former Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin to describe Jews moving away from Israel during the turbulent 1970s : “ fall-outs of weaklings ” ( Israeli Broadcasting Authority , 1976 ) .Ideology and conflict-related ideology in collective contexts Because of the benefits and costs associated with fleeing , individuals may differ in their willingness to consider this option .
Differences in flight intentions may stem from factors such as trait anxiety , personal connections abroad , socio-economic status , and more .
In socio- political contexts , one such differentiating factor is political ideology : a stable “ interrelated set of attitudes , values , and beliefs with cognitive , affective , and motivational properties ” ( Jost , Federico , & Napier , 2009 , p. 315 ) .
According to recent research , ideologies relate to both the contents of beliefs and the needs underlying them , with people tending to adopt ideologies that fulfill their own dominant needs ( Jost et al. , 2009 ) .
In violent intergroup contexts , ideological belief systems relating to the conflict receive widespread support ( Bar-Tal , 2000 , 2013 ; Cohrs , 2012 ) , as rightist ideology is generally associated with greater inter- group bias ( Altemeyer , 1996 ) .
Rightist , conflict-supporting ideology in these contexts takes on specific contents , leading to greater adherence to certain societal beliefs , including beliefs regarding patriotism , securi- ty , and unity .
Specifically , societal beliefs about patriotism focus on loyalty and sacrifice for the collective ; beliefs about security emphasize the importance of personal and national survival and modes of achiev- ing it ; and beliefs about unity emphasize the importance of facing the opponent as a cohesive unit ( Bar-Tal , 2013 ) .
These beliefs may limit individual willingness to consider flight , and may also shape responses to the experience of fear described above .
Extensive research has indicated that these context-specific ideolog- ical beliefs influence not only the attitudes ( Bar-Tal , Sharvit , Halperin , & Zafran , 2012 ) , but also the behaviors ( e.g. , information seeking , see Porat , Halperin , & Bar-Tal , 2013 ) of individuals in societies involved in intractable conflicts .
Although research has not directly examined the ideology–flight relationship ( but see recent work on migration to ideologically-similar communities , Motyl , Iyer , Oishi , Trawalter , & Nosek , 2014 ) , there are indications in the literature that the beliefs of individuals are a key motivation behind the decision not to leave one 's home in perilous times ( e.g. , Gidron , Peleg , Jaffe , & Shenhar , 2010 ) .The interactive effect of fear and ideology onwillingness to consider flight While it is clear that fear and ideology play important roles in collective contexts , little is known about their interactive influence .
Could rightists and leftists be differentially motivated by fear ?
Could their willingness to consider fleeing be more or less influenced by their heightened experience of fear ?
Our goal in the present research was to examine these as-of-yet unexamined questions .
Nonetheless , the literature contains several clues that lead to seemingly conflicting predictions , especially when examining fear in intergroup contexts .
On one hand , recent accounts of ideology indicate that rightists and leftists differ from one another in fear reactivity , such that rightists have an over-activated fear response ( e.g. , Block & Block , 2006 ; Jost , Glaser , Kruglanski , & Sulloway , 2003a , b ; Kanai , Feilden , Firth , & Rees , 2011 ; Oxley et al. , 2008 ) , and that these differences explain many right–left motivational differences ( see Jost & Amodio , 2012 ; Jost et al. , 2009 ) .
Importantly , brain research has also demonstrated right–left differences specifically relevant to avoidance tendencies , with the processing of “ conservative ” statements associated with greater activity in brain regions associated with withdrawal motivations ( Zamboni , Gozzi , Krueger , Duhamel , Sirigu , & Grafman , 2009 ) .
A review of the empirical literature has recently suggested that rightists have greater negativity bias in general , and their greater attention to negative occurrences leads them to take more steps to avoid such occurrences ( Hibbing , Smith , & Alford , 2014 ) .
These findings indicate that rightists may be more behaviorally reactive to fear-inducing stimuli in several ways , and such greater reactivity may lead to the prediction that fear would have a greater impact on rightists ' ( compared to leftists ' ) willingness to consider flight .
On the other hand , the specific contents of rightist ideology in certain contexts may lead to a competing prediction , that fearful right- ists would be less motivated than fearful leftists to consider flight .
As stated earlier , rightist ideology is associated with patriotism ( Bar-Tal , 2013 ) , and specifically blind patriotism ( Schatz , Staub , & Lavine , 1999 ) , and such patriotism promotes self-sacrifice , the opposite of physical flight from danger , especially in intergroup conflict situations .
These beliefs should be most powerful with regard to patriotism- relevant units—namely , one 's land and nation—and leaving these may be particularly at odds with patriotic beliefs .
Right-wing beliefs in con- flict situations are also associated with beliefs regarding security—and the modes of achieving it through confrontation—and unity—and its importance in facing the threatening outgroup ( Bar-Tal , 2013 ) .
These firm beliefs should limit rightists ' willingness to consider fleeing , even when experiencing fear .
Additionally , the literature suggests that right- ist ideology is associated with over-active fear responses and needs for certainty and security precisely because it functions to reduce fear and answer these needs ( Jost et al. , 2009 ) .
It follows that rightist ideology , in answering these needs , regulates the effects of fear by providing clear guidelines on how to react to ideologically-relevant threats—a notion supported by findings on ideological differences in the impact of emotions on policy support ( Pliskin , Bar-Tal , Sheppes , & Halperin , 2014 ) .
These factors support a prediction that rightists ' ( compared to leftists ' ) willingness to consider flight would be less affected by fear , at least in ideologically relevant intergroup contexts .
The present research The relevant literatures therefore lead to two seemingly contradicto- ry predictions .
Nonetheless , we argue that the contradiction can be settled by acknowledging the moderating role context plays in the relationship among ideology , fear and thewillingness to consider flight .
In other words , along the lines of research demonstrating that right–left differences in threat sensitivity , risk-aversion , and negativity bias are domain specific ( Choma , Hanoch , Hodson , & Gummerum , 2014 ; Federico , Johnston , & Lavine , 2014 ) , we believe that both predictions 2 We focused on flight from the country as it is the unit of greatest patriotic significance , thus ensuring the action would have negative implications , in addition to the security it may provide .
3 See Supplementary material for full details of the sample andmethodology , as well as the means , standard deviations , and correlations among all variables ( Table S1 ) and the manipulation check means ( Table S2 ) .
92 R. Pliskin et al .
/ Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 59 ( 2015 ) 90–95arising from the literature have merit , but the differential effects of fear on rightists and leftists are context-dependent .
As the literature indicates , rightists have a comparatively over- activated fear response , and such higher reactivity may go unchecked in the absence of clear reaction guidelines .
Thus , in contexts unrelated to ideological beliefs , we hypothesize fear will have a greater impact on the willingness of rightists ( versus leftists ) to consider flight .
On the other hand , when fear arises from ideologically-relevant developments relating to an adversarial outgroup , rightist ideology may provide clearer guidelines on how to behaviorally react .
Thus , in such ideologically-relevant contexts , we hypothesize that rightists ' willingness to consider flightwill be less fear-driven than that of leftists .
To examine these hypotheses , we conducted a large experimental study examining the interactive effects of ideology and fear on willing- ness to consider flight in two different contexts .
We predicted that context would moderate the interactive effect of induced fear and ideology , such that in an ideologically-irrelevant context , rightists ' ( compared to leftists ' ) willingness to consider flight would be more affected by fear , but in an ideologically-relevant intergroup context , rightists ' ( compared to leftists ' ) willingness to consider flight would be less affected by fear .
Method Participants A sample of 243 Jewish Israelis ( 170 females ; ages 18–87 , M = 33.83 , SD= 14.9 ) , drawn from the general population and the student body at the Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya , voluntarily participated in an online study .
We determined the sample size based on the 3- way interaction design , striving to have 30 participants in each “ cell ” ( functionally treating the ideology variable as dichotomous rather than continuous ) .
Of this initial sample , we excluded two participants who did not reside in Israel and seven who had unreasonable questionnaire-completion times ( over 1 h ) ,1 yielding a final sample of 234 participants ( 163 female ; ages 18–87 , M = 33.74 , SD = 14.87 ) .
Politically , the sample was relatively balanced , with 37.61 % of partici- pants identifying asmoderately to extremely rightist , 32.05 % as centrist , and 30.34 % as moderately to extremely leftist .
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to conditions in a 2 ( context : ideologically-irrelevant or ideologically-relevant ) × 2 ( fear-inducing or secure ) between-subjects design and filled out an online question- naire .
The questionnaire began with a contrived report from a leading Israeli news website ( see Supplementary material for the full texts of the four versions of this report ) on either an approaching epidemic ( an ideologically-irrelevant threat ) or an approaching Palestinian revolt ( “ Intifada , ” i.e. , an ideologically-relevant threat from an adversarial outgroup ) .
Following the long tradition of appraisal theorists of emotions ( e.g. , Roseman , 1984 ; Scherer , 1999 ; and see Moors , Ellsworth , Scherer , & Frijda , 2013 , for a special section on appraisal theories ) , we manipulated fear by manipulating the appraisals associated with it : the presence of a highly probable threat and low coping abilities with this threat .
Manipulating emotions bymanipulating their core appraisal themes is a common practice in research on emotions , both in general ( e.g. , Aue , Flykt , & Scherer , 2007 ; Ellsworth & Smith , 1988 ; Roseman & Evdokas , 2004 ; Russell & McAuley , 1986 ; Smith , 1989 ; Smith & Lazarus , 1993 ; van Reekum et al. , 2004 ; and the comprehensive review by Scherer , Schorr , & Johnstone , 2001 ) and in political , group-relevant contexts ( e.g. , Goldenberg , Saguy , & Halperin , 2014 ; Halperin , 2008 ; 1 We also ran all the reported analyseswithout excluding these subjects .
These analyses revealed identical trends and are reported in full in the Supplementary material.Halperin , Russell , Dweck , & Gross , 2011 ; Pliskin et al. , 2014 ) .
Thus , in the secure condition , Israeli officials are quoted assuring that Israel has the capability to significantly mitigate the approaching threat 's impact and the tools to deal with its ramifications , stressing that there is little room for worry .
In the fear-inducing condition , however , these officials state that Israel will be unable to prevent the threat and lacks the tools to deal with its ramifications effectively , stressing that the blowmay be extremely severe .
Anticipating possible right–left differences in levels of fear , we worded the fear condition so as to guarantee that the content was strong enough to raise fear across the ideological spectrum .
The text was followed by manipulation checks for levels of fear and items measuring willingness to consider flight from Israel2 in light of the approaching threat .
To ensure that this manipulation was suited for our aims , we conducted a pilot study examining whether the scenarios differed in their perceived ideological relevance , raised similar levels of fear , and targeted fear specifically .
Drawn from an online panel , 140 participants ( 70 female ; ages 19–81 , M=37.78 , SD=14.06 ; with eight excluded for failing to follow instructions ) 3 were randomly assigned to read one of the four texts and responded to measures of perceived ideological rele- vance ( 4-item measure , e.g. , “ people on the political left and right will tend to respond differently to the report presented , ” Cronbach 's α = 0.7 ) , fear in response to the threat ( 5-item measure , e.g. , “ fear of the events ' ramifications for Israeli society , ” Cronbach 's α = 0.94 ) , and other discrete negative emotions in response to the threat ( sadness , dis- gust , and despair , each measured using one item ) .
We ran a series of 3- way interaction analyses ( fear manipulation × context × ideology ) employing Hayes ' ( 2013 ) PROCESS regression procedure ( model 3 ) ,4 controlling for age , sex , whether participants had family abroad , and personal history living abroad ( variables that were also controlled for in all analyses reported in our main study below ) .
The first analysis confirmed that the epidemic scenario was perceived as less ideologically-relevant than the Palestinian uprising scenario , B = 1.36 , SE = .18 , t = 7.55 , p b .0001 , [ CI ] = [ 1 , 1.72 ] , as we had intended .
This difference was moderated by neither the fear manipulation nor individual ideology , but we found a main effect for the fear manipulation , with the fear-inducing conditions seen as less ideologically-relevant than the secure conditions , B = − .47 , SE = .18 , t = −2.64 , p b .01 , [ CI ] = [ − .82 , − .12 ] .
A separate analysis revealed that the fear-inducing condition succeeded in raising more fear than the secure condition , B = .55 , SE= .23 , t = 2.36 , p = .02 , [ CI ] = [ 0.09 , 1 ] , a difference also moderated by neither context nor ideology .
It also confirmed that the epidemic and uprising scenarios did not significantly differ in the levels of fear they induced , B= .25 , SE= .23 , t=1.07 , p= .29 , [ CI ] = [ −0.21 , 0.71 ] .
Finally , as we had intended , the fear manipu- lation did not significantly influence any of the other emotions mea- sured ( although its effect on despair was marginally significant , p = .096 , [ CI ] = [ −0.08 , 0.1 ] ) .
Importantly , all of the above findings were maintained when excluding all control variables ( with the exception of the analysis for despair , which became fully non-significant ) .Measures Participants responded to the following measures ( see Supplemen- tary material for full details of all measures , as well as means , standard deviations , and correlations among them , Tables S3 and S4 ) :4 In these analyses and in all regression analyses reported below , dichotomous variables were first coded as 0 and 1 , and then all variableswere centered using the PROCESSmacro ( see Hayes , 2013 ) .
93R .
Pliskin et al .
/ Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 59 ( 2015 ) 90–95To ensure the manipulation induced fear of the expected events , participants responded to a two-item manipulation check ( similarly- worded across scenarios , e.g. , “ Fear of the [ threat ] 's outbreak , ” r = .57 ) , as well as one of two context-specific manipulation checks .
In the ideologically-irrelevant scenario , participants indicated to what extent they feared various personal and societal consequences of the epidemic ( computed by averaging responses to six items , e.g. , “ fear of immune system damage , ” Cronbach 's α = .96 ) .
In the ideologically-relevant scenario , they indicated to what extent they feared the expected rocket fire and for the security of themselves and their families ( computed by averaging both responses , r= .67 ) .
All itemswere rated on a scale of 1 – not at all to 6 – very much so .
We also included single items assessing other emotions , to deter- mine the specificity of the manipulation 's effect ( see Supplementary material for details on these items and all relevant analyses , which indicated that these emotions could not adequately explain our findings ) .
Willingness to consider flight in light of the expected events was rated on a six-item scale assessing willingness directly ( e.g. , “ Given the opportunity , to what extent would you consider relocating to another country in light of the expected developments ? ” ) and indirectly ( e.g. , “ To what extent do you understand people who decide to leave the country at times of [ epidemic outbreaks/direct violence ] ” ) .
We included both types of items to overcome possible demand characteristics in place because immigration constitutes a societal taboo in Israel .
Participants responded on the same scale as above , and responses were averaged to create a single score ( Cronbach 's α = .90 ) .
The questionnaire included several demographic questions , counterbalanced to appear either before the manipulation or after the dependent variable .
They reported their gender , age , relative income , and political ideology ( measured on a seven-point scale ranging from 1 – extreme right to 7 – extreme left ) .
Participants also indicated where they reside , if they ever lived outside Israel , and if they have family residing abroad—variables that may be related to the willingness to consider flight.1 2 3 4 5 6 Right Left Right Left Ideologically-irrelevant scenario Ideologically-relevant scenario W ill in gn es s to C on si de r F lig ht Control Fear Fig .
1 .
The interactive influence of ideology and the fear manipulation on willingess to consider flight , as moderated by the scenario employed.Results The manipulation 's effect on fear and other emotions To ensure ourmanipulation raised levels of fear across scenarios and ideological positions , we conducted an analysis employing PROCESS Model 3 , signifying the fear manipulation as an independent variable , ideology as the primary moderator , and the scenario as the secondary moderator , R2 = .19 , F ( 11,221 ) = 4.73 , p b .0001 .
The analysis revealed a significant main effect for the fear manipulation : B = .64 , SE= .16 , t = 3.97 , p = .0001 , [ CI ] = [ 0.32 , .95 ] , indicating that overall , participants experienced more fear in the fear-inducing conditions ( M = 3.28 , SD = 1.35 ) than in the secure conditions ( M = 2.59 , SD = 1.17 ) , thus replicating our pilot study findings regarding the manipulation .
This effect was moderated by neither the scenario nor participants ' ideology , and levels of fear did not significantly differ be- tween the two scenarios , B = − .09 , SE = .16 , t = − .56 , p = .58 , [ CI ] = [ −0.41 , 0.23 ] .
We then ran two separate moderation analyses employing PROCESS Model 1 to examine whether , in each scenario ( ideologically-irrelevant scenario : R2 = .21 , F ( 7,103 ) = 3.88 , p b .001 ; ideologically-relevant scenario , R2 = .23 , F ( 7,114 ) = 4.85 , p = .0001 ) , the manipulation raised levels of context-specific fears .
The analyses revealed the manipulation significantly increased context-specific fears in both scenarios ( ideologically-irrelevant : B = .82 , SE = .24 , t = 3.33 , p = .001 , [ CI ] = [ 0.33 , 1.31 ] ; ideologically-relevant : B = .54 , SE = .23 , t = 2.31 , p = .02 , [ CI ] = [ 0.08 , 1 ] ) .
As intended , neither effect was moderated by ideology.Fear , ideology and the willingness to consider flight in politically-irrelevant and relevant contexts Next , we examined our hypothesis that ideology would moderate the manipulation 's effect on willingness to consider flight , but that the nature of this moderating effect would be context-dependent .
To this end , we employed the 3-way interaction procedure described above , R2 = .28 , F ( 11,217 ) = 7.76 , p b .0001 .
In addition to finding a main effect for the fear manipulation on willingness to consider flight ( B = .45 , SE= .14 , t= 3.16 , p b .005 , [ CI ] = [ 0.17 , 0.73 ] ) , we found the expected 3-way interaction , such that the scenario significantly moderated the interactive effect ideology and the fear manipulation had on this will- ingness ( Binteraction = − .7 , SE = .23 , t = −3.04 , p b .005 , [ CI ] = [ −1.16 , −0.25 ] ; see Fig .
1 ) .
The interaction term remained significant when controlling for the questionnaire 's counterbalanced order and also when removing all controls ( Binteraction = − .55 , SE = .25 , t = −2.23 , p = .03 , [ CI ] = [ −1.04 , −0.06 ] ) .
To disentangle this interaction , we first looked at the conditional effect of the ideology × fear-manipulation interaction at the two values of the scenario moderator .
Both interactions were significant but in opposite directions ( ideologically-irrelevant : Binteraction = − .39 , SE = .18 , t = −2.17 , p = .03 , [ CI ] = [ −0.74 , − .04 ] ; ideologically-relevant : Binteraction = .32 , SE = .14 , t = 2.19 , p = .03 , [ CI ] = [ 0.03 , 0.6 ] ) .
In the ideologically-irrelevant scenario , the manipulation affected willingness to consider flight only among those one standard deviation below the mean of ideology , hereafter termed rightists ( B = 1.04 , SE = .32 , t = 3.3 , p = .001 , [ CI ] = [ 0.42 , 1.66 ] ) , surprisingly having no influence over those one standard deviation above the mean , hereafter termed leftists ( B = .04 , SE = .31 , t = .15 , p = .88 , [ CI ] = [ −0.56 , 0.65 ] ) .
In the ideologically-relevant scenario , however , the manipulation had no significant effect on rightists ( B = − .04 , SE = .26 , t = − .14 , p = .89 , [ CI ] = [ −0.56 , 0.48 ] ) , but it significantly increased willingness to consider flight among leftists ( B = .78 , SE = .27 , t =2.84 , p = .005 , [ CI ] = [ 0.24 , 1.32 ) .
The analysis thus confirmed our predictions .
Discussion Understanding the effects of fear in political contexts is of major theoretical importance .
The literature on fear has for years demonstrat- ed its potency in affecting withdrawal tendencies from frightening situations , but has rarely addressed various factors that may moderate fear 's impact—among them long-standing ideological beliefs and unique contextual attributes .
Similarly , the literature on ideology has contributed to our understanding of interpersonal differences in fear reactivity , but has not clearly examined how such differences may be related to differing outcomes in the face of fear .
94 R. Pliskin et al .
/ Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 59 ( 2015 ) 90–95In this study , we endeavored to examine the interactive influence of ideology and fear on one extreme form of withdrawal intention : physi- cally leaving one 's country .
To settle the seemingly-contradictory predictions stemming from the literature , we hypothesized that context would moderate the outcomes of this interaction .
Specifically , in ideologically-irrelevant contexts , fear would have a greater impact on rightists ' ( versus leftists ' ) willingness to consider flight because of their greater behavioral reactivity to fear-inducing experiences .
In ideologically-relevant contexts characterized by a focal intergroup conflict , however , rightist ideology provides clear guidelines for an appropriate reaction , and therefore rightists ( versus leftists ) would be less moved by their fear to consider flight .
To examine this hypothesis , wemanipulated both fear levels and the type of context .
We found that ideology moderated the effect of fear on flight intentions in two very different ways , depending on the fear- inducing context .
Inducing fear of an approaching epidemic ( an ideologically-irrelevant threat ) among Jewish Israelis led to increased willingness to consider flight only among rightists , but inducing fear of a Palestinian uprising ( an ideologically-relevant threat from an ad- versarial outgroup ) among this population led to increased willingness to consider flight only among leftists .
The findings thus provided sup- port for our hypothesis that context shapes the interactive influence of fear and ideology on flight intentions .
Theoretical implications These findings may contribute to our understanding of how behav- ior intentions are shaped by two very important constructs—ideology and emotions—thus contributing to both relevant bodies of literature .
First , they illuminate differences stemming from political ideology , pro- viding greater insight into right–left differences in affective processes .
Specifically , by placing the spotlight on fear 's outcomes , this study indi- cates that rightists and leftists may differ not only in their reactivity to fear-inducing stimuli , but also in their readiness to act in fear 's wake .
In doing so , we extend our recent findings ( Pliskin et al. , 2014 ) that the impact of various emotions , including fear , on policy support is moderated by ideology .
In the present examination , we learn that this is true for behavior intentions as well , but we also learn that the direc- tion of this interactive effect is context-dependent , with the context 's relation to ideological beliefs playing a crucial role .
Consequently , these findings join previous work arguing that contextual factors must be taken into account when considering ideological differences in psy- chological reactions to threatening or otherwise negative situations ( e.g. , Choma et al. , 2014 ; Federico et al. , 2014 ) .
This study also contributes to our understanding of fear and other emotions , as it challenges the common notion that emotions always lead to the behavioral intentions associated with them ( e.g. , Lerner et al. , 2003 ) .
We identified at least two factors that may determine to what extent emotions lead to action tendencies : long-term individual factors such as ideology , and external factors such as context .
These both play an undeniable role in shaping the end result of emotional processes—with certain orientationsmore conducive to behavioral out- comes than others under different circumstances ( see Halperin & Pliskin , 2015 , for a full discussion of the importance of acknowledging context when studying emotional processes ) .
These findings also shed new light on the specific role of fear in po- litical contexts .
Thus far , fear has usually been examined for its role in increasing or decreasing support for conciliatory ( Halperin , 2011 ; Lerner et al. , 2003 ; Sabucedo , Duran , Alzate , & Rodríguez , 2011 ) or ag- gressive ( see Bar-Tal , 2013 ; Skitka et al. , 2006 ) policies , or for its role in motivating simple everyday personal actions ( Huddy et al. , 2002 ) .
Nonetheless , physical departure might also be a relevant means of safeguarding oneself in the face of threatening situations , albeit an ex- treme and costly one .
We find in these studies that even in contexts characterized by high identification and attachment , and in which the social costs of physical escape are particularly high , fear may increasepeople 's willingness to consider leaving their country .
Such an under- standingmay be important to thewider understanding of psychological processes underlying human migration .
Limitations and future directions The findings of the present research reveal the importance of ac- knowledging different types of context , but they fall short of empirically illuminating the process by which the varying ideological weight of the context influences the outcomes of rightists ' and leftists ' emotions .
The findings were in accordance with our hypotheses , and thus point to a potential role for rightist ideology as a coping mechanism in the face of certain ideologically-relevant fears—a role that is absent in the face of ideologically-irrelevant fears .
Nonetheless , there may be other expla- nations for the difference between the two scenarios , such as the pres- ence or absence of a target for blame attribution , differences in the contexts ' relation to varying moral foundations ( see Graham , Haidt , & Nosek , 2009 ) , differences in appraisals of the threat and/or challenge posed by the situation ( see Blascovich & Mendes , 2000 ) , and differences stemming from varying perceptions of control .
An empirical examina- tion of the processes involved in these differences is necessary to gain a fuller understanding of the role of context , ideology , and emotion in affecting individual action tendencies .
Because threat was a central ele- ment in our manipulation , future research focusing on ideological dif- ferences in the relationship between different types of threat and flight intentions may be especially valuable .
An additional central limitation of the present research is its concep- tual focus on the right edge of the ideological spectrum , providing right- focused hypotheses while acknowledging the left strictly for compara- tive purposes .
This stems from a similar focus on rightists in much of the relevant psychological literature ( e.g. , Jost et al. , 2003a ) , but it creates a gap in our understanding of ideology as ( at-least ) a bi- directional construct .
Indeed , our finding that fear of an ideologically- irrelevant threat increased rightists ' but not leftists ' willingness to consider flightwas partially perplexing because of this reduced theoret- ical focus on the psychology of leftist ideology , indicating another process may be at play in leftists ' reactions to fear .
In line with recent empirical examinations focusing on the left end of the spectrum ( Choma , Hafer , Dywan , Segalowitz , & Busseri , 2012 ; van der Toorn , Napier , & Dovidio , 2014 ) , further research is required to illuminate the psychological processes motivating ideological leftists .
Finally , while it reveals substantial differences between two differ- ent fear-inducing contexts , the two contexts employed can only begin to cover the wide range or real-world types of fear-inducing situations .
Other fear-inducing situations exist that may be related or unrelated to ideology and intergroup conflict in different ways .
The many possible differences in situational features indicate great potential for added knowledge in examining other types of fear-inducing contexts in the future .
In summary , the present research sheds light on several phenomena important for the understanding of social and political processes related to migration .
First , it examines an action tendency of great political significance—migration in the face of threat .
Second , it places fear , a highly influential emotion , in context , examining how fear induced by different types of threat may lead to different outcomes for different people .
Finally , it acknowledges and sheds light on the role of ideology as a moderating factor for the outcomes of emotional processes , show- ing that its function , like that of fear , is highly context-dependent .
Acknowledgments This study was partially funded by a European Research Council grant [ 335607 ] to the third author .
The authors would like to thank Lital Diamond and Rachel Marsha for their help in the process of conducting this research .
95R .
Pliskin et al .
/ Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 59 ( 2015 ) 90–95Appendix A .
Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http : //dx .
doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2015.04.001 .
References Altemeyer , B .
( 1996 ) .
The authoritarian specter .
Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press .
Aue , T. , Flykt , A. , & Scherer , K.R .
( 2007 ) .
First evidence for differential and sequential efferent effects of goal relevance and goal conduciveness appraisal .
Biological Psychology , 74 , 347–357 .
Bar-Tal , D. ( 2000 ) .
Shared beliefs in a society : Social psychological analysis .
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .
Bar-Tal , D. ( 2013 ) .
Intractable conflicts : Socio-psychological foundations and dynamics .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
Bar-Tal , D. , Sharvit , K. , Halperin , E. , & Zafran , A .
( 2012 ) .
Ethos of conflict : The concept and its measurement .
Peace and Conflict : Journal of Peace Psychology , 18 ( 1 ) , 40 .
Blascovich , J. , & Mendes , W.B .
( 2000 ) .
Challenge and threat appraisals : The role of affec- tive cues .
In J.P. Forgas ( Ed .
) , Feeling and thinking : The role of affect in social cognition ( pp .
59–82 ) .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
Block , J. , & Block , J.H .
( 2006 ) .
Nursery school personality and political orientation two de- cades later .
Journal of Research in Personality , 40 , 734–749 .
Cannon , W. ( 1932 ) .
The wisdom of the body .
New York : W.W. Norton and Co. Choma , B.L. , Hafer , C.L. , Dywan , J. , Segalowitz , S.J. , & Busseri , M.A .
( 2012 ) .
Political liberal- ism and political conservatism : Functionally independent ?
Personality and Individual Differences , 53 , 431–436 .
Choma , B.L. , Hanoch , Y. , Hodson , G. , & Gummerum , M. ( 2014 ) .
Risk propensity among lib- erals and conservatives : The effect of risk perception , expected benefits , and risk do- main .
Social Psychological and Personality Science , 5 , 713–721 .
Cohrs , J.C. ( 2012 ) .
Ideological bases of violent conflict .
In L.R .
Tropp ( Ed .
) , Oxford handbook of intergroup conflict ( pp .
53–71 ) .
New York : Oxford University Press .
Ellsworth , P.C. , & Smith , C.A .
( 1988 ) .
Shades of joy : Patterns of appraisal differentiating pleasant emotions .
Cognition & Emotion , 2 , 301–331 .
Federico , C.M. , Johnston , C.D. , & Lavine , H.G .
( 2014 ) .
Context , engagement , and the ( mul- tiple ) functions of negativity bias .
Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 37 ( 3 ) , 311–312 .
Frijda , N.H. , Kuipers , P. , & ter Schure , L. ( 1989 ) .
Relations among emotion , appraisal and action tendency .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 , 212–228 .
Gidron , D. , Peleg , K. , Jaffe , D. , & Shenhar , G. ( 2010 ) .
Civilians under fire : Evacuation behav- iour in north Israel during the Second Lebanon War .
Disasters , 34 ( 4 ) , 996–1012 .
Goldenberg , A. , Saguy , T. , & Halperin , E. ( 2014 ) .
How group-based emotions are shaped by collective emotions : Evidence for emotional transfer and emotional burden .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 107 ( 4 ) , 581–596 .
Graham , J. , Haidt , J. , & Nosek , B.A .
( 2009 ) .
Liberals and conservatives rely on different sets of moral foundations .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 96 ( 5 ) , 1029–1046 .
Gray , J.A .
( 1987 ) .
The psychology of fear and stress ( 2nd ed . ) .
New York : Cambridge Uni- versity Press .
Halperin , E. ( 2008 ) .
Group-based hatred in intractable conflict in Israel .
Journal of Conflict Resolution , 52 , 713–736 .
Halperin , E. ( 2011 ) .
Emotional barriers to peace : Emotions and public opinion of Jewish Israelis about the peace process in the Middle East .
Peace and Conflict : Journal of Peace Psychology , 17 , 22–45 .
Halperin , E. , & Pliskin , R. ( 2015 ) .
Emotions and emotion regulation in intractable conflict : Studying emotional processes within a unique context .
Political Psychology , 36 ( S1 ) , 119–150 .
Halperin , E. , Russell , A.G. , Dweck , C.S. , & Gross , J.J. ( 2011 ) .
Anger , hatred , and the quest for peace : Anger can be constructive in the absence of hatred .
Journal of Conflict Resolution , 55 ( 2 ) , 274–291 .
Hayes , A.F .
( 2013 ) .
Introduction to mediation , moderation , and conditional process analysis : A regression-based approach .
Guilford Press .
Hibbing , J.R. , Smith , K.B. , & Alford , J.R. ( 2014 ) .
Differences in negativity bias underlie variations in political ideology .
Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 37 ( 3 ) , 297–307 .
Huddy , L. , Feldman , S. , Capelos , T. , & Provost , C. ( 2002 ) .
The consequences of terrorism : Disentangling the effects of personal and national threat .
Political Psychology , 23 ( 3 ) , 485–509 .
Huddy , L. , Feldman , S. , Taber , C. , & Lahav , G. ( 2005 ) .
Threat , anxiety , and support of anti- terrorism policies .
American Journal of Political Science , 49 ( 3 ) , 593–608 .
Israeli Broadcasting Authority ( producer ) ( 1976 , May 4 ) .
Special interviewwith PrimeMin- ister Yitzhak Rabin on The Israeli Television [ Television broadcast ] .
Jerusalem : Israeli Broadcasting Authority.Jost , J.T. , & Amodio , D.M .
( 2012 ) .
Political ideology as motivated social cognition : Behav- ioral and neuroscientific evidence .
Motivation and Emotion , 36 ( 1 ) , 55–64 .
Jost , J.T. , Federico , C.M. , & Napier , J.L .
( 2009 ) .
Political ideology : Its structure , functions , and elective affinities .
Annual Review of Psychology , 60 , 307–337 .
Jost , J.T. , Glaser , J. , Kruglanski , A.W. , & Sulloway , F.J. ( 2003a ) .
Political conservatism as mo- tivated social cognition .
Psychological Bulletin , 129 , 339–375 .
Jost , J.T. , Glaser , J. , Kruglanski , A.W. , & Sulloway , F.J. ( 2003b ) .
Exceptions that prove the rule—using a theory ofmotivated social cognition to account for ideological incongru- ities and political anomalies : Reply to Greenberg and Jonas ( 2003 ) .
Psychological Bulletin , 129 , 383–393 .
Kanai , R. , Feilden , T. , Firth , C. , & Rees , G. ( 2011 ) .
Political orientations are correlated with brain structure in young adults .
Current Biology , 21 , 677–680 .
Lerner , J.S. , Gonzalez , R.M. , Small , D.A. , & Fischhoff , B .
( 2003 ) .
Effects of fear and anger on perceived risks of terrorism : A national field experiment .
Psychological Science , 14 ( 2 ) , 144–150 .
Moors , A. , Ellsworth , P.C. , Scherer , K.R. , & Frijda , N.H. ( 2013 ) .
Appraisal theories of emo- tion : State of the art and future development [ Special section ] .
Emotion Review , 5 ( 2 ) , 119–191 .
Motyl , M. , Iyer , R. , Oishi , S. , Trawalter , S. , & Nosek , B.A .
( 2014 ) .
How ideological migration geographically segregates groups .
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 51 , 1–14 .
Öhman , A .
( 1993 ) .
Stimulus prepotency and fear learning : Data and theory .
In N. Birbaumer , & A. Öhman ( Eds .
) , The structure of emotion : Psychophysiological , cognitive , and clinical aspects ( pp .
218–239 ) .
Seattle , WA : Hogrefe and Huber .
Oxley , D.R. , Smith , K.B. , Alford , J.R. , Hibbing , M.V. , Miller , M.S. , Hatemi , P.K. , et al .
( 2008 ) .
Political attitudes vary with physiological traits .
Science , 321 , 1667–1670 .
Pettigrew , T.F. , & Tropp , L.R .
( 2006 ) .
A meta-analytic test of intergroup contact theory .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 90 ( 5 ) , 751 .
Pliskin , R. , Bar-Tal , D. , Sheppes , G. , & Halperin , H. ( 2014 ) .
Are leftists more emotion-driven than rightists ?
The interactive influence of ideology and emotions on support for pol- icies .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 40 ( 12 ) , 1681–1697 .
Porat , R. , Halperin , E. , & Bar-Tal , D. ( 2013 , August 23 ) .
The effect of socio-psychological barriers on the processing of new information about peace opportunities .
Journal of Conflict Resolution .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022002713499719 ( Advance online publication ) .
Rachman , S. ( 1978 ) .
Fears : A three systems analysis .
Cognitive Behaviour Therapy , 7 ( 4 ) , 237–245 .
Roseman , I.J .
( 1984 ) .
Cognitive determinants of emotion : A structural theory .
Review of Per- sonality & Social Psychology .
Roseman , I.J. , & Evdokas , A .
( 2004 ) .
Appraisals cause experienced emotions : Experimental evidence .
Cognition & Emotion , 18 , 1–28 .
Russell , D. , & McAuley , E. ( 1986 ) .
Causal attributions , causal dimensions , and affective re- actions to success and failure .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 50 ( 6 ) , 1174 .
Sabucedo , J.M. , Duran , M. , Alzate , M. , & Rodríguez , M.S .
( 2011 ) .
Emotional responses and attitudes to the peace talks with ETA .
Revista Latinoamericana de Psicología , 43 , 289–296 .
Schatz , R.T. , Staub , E. , & Lavine , H. ( 1999 ) .
On the varieties of national attachment : Blind versus constructive patriotism .
Political Psychology , 20 ( 1 ) , 151–174 .
Scherer , K.R .
( 1999 ) .
Appraisal theory .
In T. Dalgleish , & M.J. Power ( Eds .
) , Handbook of cognition and emotion ( pp .
637–663 ) .
Chichester , England : Wiley .
Scherer , K.R. , Schorr , A. , & Johnstone , T .
( Eds . ) .
( 2001 ) .
Appraisal processes in emotion : Theory , methods , research .
New York , NY : Oxford University Press .
Skitka , L.J. , Bauman , C.W. , Aramovich , N.P. , & Morgan , G.S .
( 2006 ) .
Confrontational and preventative policy responses to terrorism : Anger wants a fight and fear wants “ them ” to go away .
Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 28 ( 4 ) , 375–384 .
Smith , C.A .
( 1989 ) .
Dimensions of appraisal and physiological response in emotion .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 56 , 339–353 .
Smith , C.A. , & Lazarus , R.S .
( 1993 ) .
Appraisal components , core relational themes , and the emotions .
Cognition & Emotion , 7 , 233–269 .
van der Toorn , J. , Napier , J.L. , & Dovidio , J.F .
( 2014 ) .
We the people : Intergroup interde- pendence breeds liberalism .
Social Psychological and Personality Science , 5 , 616–622 .
van Reekum , C. , Banse , R. , Johnstone , T. , Etter , A. , Wehrle , T. , & Scherer , K.R .
( 2004 ) .
Psy- chophysiological responses to appraisal responses in a computer game .
Cognition & Emotion , 18 , 663–688 .
Zamboni , G. , Gozzi , M. , Krueger , F. , Duhamel , J. , Sirigu , A. , & Grafman , J .
( 2009 ) .
Individu- alism , conservatism , and radicalism as criteria for processing political beliefs : a para- metric fMRI study .
Social Neuroscience , 4 , 367–383 .
