RAMIREZ_Criminology_2013_DK1r.pdf
aUl7boTQ1.E3LgVBzxLX34R8vlKi-RAMIREZ_Criminology_2013_DK1r.pdf.plain.html

PUNITIVE SENTIMENT∗ MARK D. RAMIREZ School of Politics and Global Studies Arizona State University KEYWORDS : public opinion , punishment , time series Scholarship has long noted the importance of understanding the changes that occur over time in aggregate public support for punitive criminal justice policies .
Yet , the lack of a reliable and valid measure of this concept limits our understanding of this aspect of the criminal justice system .
This research develops a measure of public support for punitive policies from 1951 to 2006 using 242 administrations of 24 unique sur- vey indicators .
It argues that punitive sentiment is politically constructed via frames focusing on the permissiveness of the criminal justice system .
Punitive sentiment is estimated with an error-correction model showing both the short- and long-term relationships between punitive sentiment and presidential framing of crime , public dissatisfaction with social wel- fare policies , and perceptions of racial integration .
The results highlight the complex dynamics responsible for the change over time in punitive sentiment as well as the possibilities of obtaining public support for al- ternative solutions to crime .
This research describes and explains punitive sentiment .
Punitive senti- ment is the aggregate public support for criminal justice policies that punish offenders .
The punitive sentiment of the nation as a whole is an impor- tant component of theories about the changes in America ’ s criminal jus- tice system ( Beckett , 1997 ; Edsall and Edsall , 1992 ; Frost , 2010 ; Garland , 2001 ; Simon , 2007 ; Tonry , 1995 : Western , 2006 : Wilson , 1975 ) .
For instance , Pratt ( 2002 : 181 ) noted that the victim , the offender , the state , and the ∗ Additional supporting information can be found in the listing for this article in the Wiley Online Library at http : //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1745– 9125.12006/crim.2011.51.issue-2/issuetoc .
Thanks to David A. M. Peterson , Paul Kellstedt , Andrew Martin , and James Monogan for comments on earlier drafts of this research .
Special thanks to the journal reviewers and Eric P. Baumer for detailed comments during the review process .
Data are available at http : //www.public.asu.edu/∼mdramir .
Direct corre- spondence to Mark D. Ramirez , School of Politics and Global Studies , Arizona State University , Coor Hall , 6th Floor , P.O .
Box 873902 , Tempe , AZ 85287–3902 ( e-mail : mark.ramirez @ asu.edu ) .
C© 2013 American Society of Criminology doi : 10.1111/1745-9125.12007 CRIMINOLOGY Volume 51 Number 2 2013 329 330 RAMIREZ public comprise the “ new axis of penal power ” responsible for the expan- sion of punitive policies .
Gottschalk ( 2006 ) argued that the public ’ s accep- tance of punitive policies provided the environment necessary for the ex- pansion of the punitive state .
Others have argued that punitive sentiment serves as a barometer that politicians use when taking positions on crime policies during campaigns ( Beckett , 1997 ; Beckett and Sasson , 2004 ; Inder- maur and Hough , 2002 ; Zimring , Hawkins , and Kamin , 2001 ) and when jus- tifying changes in policy ( Flanagan , 1996 ; Wilson , 1975 ) .
Of course , these theories suggest that punitive policies are the result of a complex series of forces—shifts in crime , interest group coalitions , drug usage , political cul- ture , and race relations .
However , public opinion plays some role in most theories of punitive politics .
Yet , the study of the dynamics of public support for punitive policies is still in its infancy—limited by the scarcity of temporal data .
Pollsters rarely measure support for the same policy consistently across time .
In- stead , scholars have relied on a sparse selection of polls to make inferences about the dynamics of punitive sentiment .
Beckett ( 1997 : 80 ) examined the percentage of support for capital punishment in 1965 and 1988 to draw conclusions about the changing nature of punitive sentiment .
Similarly , Stinchcombe et al .
( 1980 : 16–38 ) examined support for capital punishment and tougher courts using the General Social Survey ( GSS ) .
They concluded that the existing “ series of data points does not adequately characterize the historical movement [ of punitive sentiment ] . ” Temporal inconsistencies in the administration of the same question and the inability of any single ques- tion to measure the complexity of public punitiveness also limits the system- atic study of punitive sentiment .
Instead , most of our understanding of public support for crime poli- cies derives from cross-sectional research that has focused on the deter- minants of individual attitudes ( e.g. , Bobo and Johnson , 2004 ; Costelloe , Chiricos , and Gertz , 2009 ; Stalans , 2002 ; Unnever and Cullen , 2010 ) .
Yet , theories often speak of historical changes in public opinion in response to macrolevel social , political , and economic forces .
These conditions change over time and yet are treated as constants within cross-sectional research .
Cross-sectional research designs also assume static relationships between variables .
Theories , on the other hand , suggest short- and long-term tem- poral relationships among concepts .
Subsequently , a need exists to measure punitive sentiment over time to test theories about the dynamics of public support for punitive policies .
That is the goal of this research .
The development of a dynamic indicator of punitive sentiment can pro- vide a means of addressing descriptive questions about public support for punitive policies .
Foremost , how has punitive sentiment changed over time ?
What is the range of punitive sentiment , and what historical periods exhibit the highest and lowest levels of public support for punitive policies ?
Does PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 331 punitive sentiment revolve around a stable equilibrium , does it experience trends , and are there moments of abrupt change ?
The answers to these de- scriptive questions have theoretical significance .
For instance , the presence of a trend would be consistent with theories about the inability of punitive policies to satisfy the public ’ s emotional demand for punishment ( Aladjem , 2008 ) .
Evidence of periods of abrupt change would be consistent with the- ories suggesting “ turning points ” in sentiment after such events as the as- sassination of President Kennedy in 1963 ( Erskine , 1974 ) , the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act ( Flamm , 2005 ) , or the 1968 presidential campaign ( Loo and Grimes , 2004 ) .
Moreover , a dynamic indicator of punitive sentiment provides a means to assess theories about the causes and consequences of public puni- tiveness .
Theoretical research has suggested the politicization of crime ( Beckett , 1997 ; Beckett and Sasson , 2004 ; Edsall and Edsall , 1992 ; Garland , 2001 ; Mauer , 2006 ; Scheingold , 1998 ) , changes in drug use ( Beckett , 1997 ; Blumstein , 2003 ; Kautt and Spohn , 2002 ) , growing distrust toward govern- ment ( Simon , 2007 ; Zimring , 2003 ) , increased public concern about crime ( Langworthy and Whitehead , 1986 ; Wilson , 1975 ) , and changing racial ani- mus ( Mann , 1993 ; Mauer , 2006 ; Russell , 1998 ; Skogan , 1995 ; Stabile , 2006 ; Tonry , 1995 ; Walker , Spohn , and DeLone , 1996 ) may be responsible for the rise in public support for punitive policies .
A measure of punitive sentiment over time provides a means to test the dynamic aspects of these theories sys- tematically .
The next section describes the concept of punitive sentiment and jus- tifies its construction at the macrolevel .
I then argue that punitive senti- ment moves in response to the politicization of crime by national political actors—particularly the framing of crime as a problem of a lenient criminal justice system .
An annual indicator of punitive sentiment for the years 1951 to 2006 is developed from 242 administrations of 24 different survey indi- cators using a dyadic ratio algorithm .
Punitive sentiment is then estimated using a single equation error-correction model .
The results show that puni- tive sentiment moves in response to presidential frames , support for domes- tic social policies , and perceptions of racial integration .
Contrary to much microlevel research , the findings also show a more rational public willing to update its policy preferences in response to changing crime conditions .
The conclusion discusses the implications of these results and provides sugges- tions for future research .
CONCEPT OF PUNITIVE SENTIMENT The concept of interest is the public ’ s support or opposition for punitive criminal justice policies , which I shall label punitive sentiment .
Punitive sen- timent is a general positive or negative evaluation of the punitiveness of the 332 RAMIREZ criminal justice system .
Punitive criminal justice policies are those that pun- ish , incapacitate , or increase the transaction costs of crime .
Policies that in- crease the authority and resources of law enforcement agencies or the penal system at the expense of policies that target the social causes of crime also can be classified as punitive ( Wilson , 1975 ) .
Punitive policies range from capital punishment to mandatory sentencing to increasing the authority of law enforcement officials .
Rehabilitation in prisons and drug treatment pro- grams are examples of nonpunitive policies .
Moreover , punitive sentiment is a national phenomenon—aggregating the opinions of the public as a whole .
Scholars often speak of a na- tional mood toward punitive policies despite it being a mere ( and some- times imperfect ) indicator for a more complex set of competing interests .
Stinchcombe et al .
( 1980 : 30 ) for instance , argued that changes in public support for “ capital punishment and tough courts are manifestations of a general tendency to be punitive toward criminals. ” Flanagan ( 1996 : 5 ) wrote that polls “ illuminate the public ’ s mood and priorities for criminal justice reform. ” Simon , López , and Frampton ( 2008 : 5 ) noted that “ after three decades and more , the national mood may be swinging against the war on crime. ” All these studies assumed a common public sentiment to- ward punitive policies .
Tonry ( 1995 : 34–35 ) argued that this general sentiment is more conse- quential for politics and policy despite its inability to represent the complex- ity of opinions ( also see Beckett and Sasson , 2004 : 45–72 ) .
Consistent with this notion , Schneider ( 2006 : 457 ) found that changes in state incarceration rates respond “ as if some kind of national policy mood was important. ” Nicholson-Crotty , Peterson , and Ramirez ( 2009 : 633 ) also suggested that “ political actors may not respond to specific opinions with specific actions , but rather will adjust criminal justice policy in response to the population ’ s mood for more or less punitiveness. ” This is not to deny the importance of individual or subnational opinions but simply to note that these heteroge- nous interests can sometimes emerge as a single voice—something many scholars have informally referred to as a punitive mood or sentiment .
EXPLAINING PUNITIVE SENTIMENT Support for punitive policies often is characterized as a top-down process .
According to this argument , support for punitive policies is constructed by politicians looking to advance their political careers and policy goals ( Beckett , 1997 ) .
Of course , the relationship is endogenous because politi- cians debate the issue using frames that connect with the existing values and beliefs of the public .
Yet , these frames can shape how the public thinks about an issue and thereby alter public support for punitive policies .
The most common frame involved portraying crime as a problem stemming PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 333 from a permissive criminal justice system ( Beckett and Sasson , 2004 : 78 ) .
This depiction of crime is theorized to have shaped support for punitive sen- timent across time .
However , the influence of such frames on public support for punitive policies is still unclear in the absence of a dynamic indicator of the concept .
The development of the permissive frame is something akin to con- ventional wisdom .
The politicization of crime started among conservative politicians opposed to racial integration ( Beckett , 1997 ; Feeley , 2003 ) .
Dur- ing the 1950s , conservatives attempted to link the issue of crime to increas- ing protests and legislation for racial equality .
These politicians argued that the civil rights movement fostered lawlessness and public disorder .
As racial integration and equality became a social norm that many citizens were less willing to explicitly oppose , support for “ law and order ” became the subtext for racial animus ( Barkan and Cohn , 1994 ) .
The strategy of pandering to those opposed to racial integration by ad- vocating a “ law-and-order ” platform also evolved to attacks on social wel- fare .
Social welfare programs had given liberal Democrats an electoral ad- vantage since Roosevelt ’ s New Deal ( Petrocik , 1996 ) .
Once conservatives raised the issue of crime , liberals argued that social welfare programs were effective in fighting both poverty and reducing crime .
President Johnson ’ s 1964 speech in Dayton , Ohio , summarized this perspective : There is something mighty wrong when a candidate for the highest office bemoans violence in the streets but votes against the war on poverty , votes against the Civil Rights Act , and votes against major ed- ucational bills that come before him as a legislator .
Conservatives countered that social programs amounted to coddling criminals rather than encouraging self-reliance and moral rectitude .
Lib- eral social policies were argued to be a means of supporting criminals rather than a means to reduce crime .
Crime was growing because the system was more concerned with the rights of criminals rather than of victims .
Con- servatives attacked the two keystone liberal policies , racial equality and the war on poverty , with “ tough-on-crime ” rhetoric .
Theoretically , these frames should have increased the public ’ s demand for punitive policies both di- rectly and indirectly by reducing the public ’ s belief that social welfare poli- cies could solve the crime problem .
By the 1970s , the dominate frames across the nation focused on the per- missiveness of the system versus the need to treat the social causes of crime .
The increasing use of crack cocaine , among other drugs , during the 1980s also provided a means for the federal government to expand the war on drugs and garner more support for punitive policies .
Yet even during this period , President Reagan continued to blame crime on a permissive system : 334 RAMIREZ When we arrived in Washington we faced a nation in which criminals were running rampant because liberal judges were so interested in pro- tecting the so-called rights of the bad guys , they were placing the good guys at risk .
We came in and appointed judges who respect the law , re- spect the constitution and know the meaning of the word punishment .
( 24 Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents 1438 ) The “ tough-on-crime ” platform eventually led to electoral gains by Republicans pushing Democrats to alter their position on crime .
By the presidency of Bill Clinton , Democrats had begun to embrace the punitive policies of conservatives ( Holian , 2004 ) , which potentially moved punitive sentiment into a stable equilibrium .
There are multiple expectations from this narrative .
Empirically , little ev- idence exists that punitive sentiment responds to actual crime conditions or even public concern over crime ( Beckett , 1997 ) .
The more political actors frame the issue of crime as a problem of a permissive justice system , the more we should observe increases in punitive sentiment .
Decreasing sup- port for social welfare policies also should be correlated with increasing support for punitive solutions to crime .
In addition , we should observe a relationship between changing racial conditions and punitive sentiment .
Blalock ( 1967 ) suggested that Whites ’ support for punitive policies derives from a desire to use the state to con- trol minority populations ( also see Chiricos , Welch , and Gertz , 2004 ) .
The growth in minority populations should lead to an increase in punitive senti- ment as the largest ethnic group in the population ( Whites ) felt threatened .
Barlow ( 1998 ) presented a slightly nuanced version of the theory that is more specific to the issue of crime and punishment .
Rather than a mere increase in the size of the Black population , it is increases in civil rights and integration since the 1960s that have threatened White Americans and have led to increases in support for punitive policies ( also see Ogletree , 2002 ) .
Another factor that may have altered punitive sentiment is the public ’ s distrust of government ( Simon , 2007 ; Soss , Langbein , and Metelko , 2003 ; Tyler and Boeckmann , 1997 ; Unnever and Cullen , 2010 ; Zimring , 2003 ) .
The latter research has disagreed about the direction of the relationship be- tween trust and support for punitive policies as well as the various moder- ators of this relationship .
One expectation has been that increases in public distrust in government should be associated with decreases in punitive sup- port .
Soss , Langbein , and Metelko ( 2003 ) argued the public should be less willing to grant governments the authority to punish as it becomes aware of governmental abuses of power ( e.g. , racial disparities and exonerations ) .
However , Zimring ( 2003 ) noted a paradox in the relationship between trust PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 335 and support for punitive policies .
Punitive policies increase the authority of the government .
Therefore , increasing trust in government should correlate with increases in support for punitive policies .
Yet , historically , the growth of distrust has been toward the government ’ s inability to protect the public from criminals .
This distrust should lead to an increase , rather than to a de- crease , in support for punitive policies .
It is not that the public distrusts the government from abusing its authority ; rather , the public distrusts the gov- ernment to put public safety ahead of due process.1 Simon ( 2007 : 155 ) also argued that punitive sentiment and trust in government are linked .
Puni- tive sentiment should be low when the public has faith in government and government-sponsored welfare programs as a means to solve crime .
Yet , when the public starts to distrust government officials , it turns to punitive policies as a solution to crime .
Research has shown mixed findings regarding trust and support for puni- tive policies .
Several studies have found no relationship between trust in the courts and support for punitive policies ( Tyler and Boeckmann , 1997 ; Unnever and Cullen , 2010 ) .
Unnever and Cullen ( 2010 ) also found that per- ceptions of crime failed to moderate the relationship between distrust and policy support .
Trust in the executive branch was shown to correlate with higher support for capital punishment ( Unnever and Cullen , 2005 ) .
Soss , Langbein , and Metelko ( 2003 ) found that White citizens with more trust in the government are more supportive of capital punishment and that the ef- fect of trust is larger than other predictors of support such as demographic factors , partisanship , and racial prejudice .
However , Messner , Baumer , and Rosenfeld ( 2006 ) found that White Americans with higher levels of distrust are more supportive of capital punishment , whereas the relationship is re- versed for Black Americans .
DATA AND METHODS This section describes both the data and methods for the analysis .
First , it discusses the construction of the punitive sentiment index .
Then , the index of punitive sentiment is evaluated showing the common connection among support for different punitive policies between 1951 and 2006 .
Finally , it 1 .
Zimring ( 2003 ) argued that the relationship between trust and policy support might be stronger in Southern states with a history of vigilantism .
Thus , testing this theory at an aggregate ( national ) level of analysis might be a bit unfair .
However , Messner , Baumer , and Rosenfeld ( 2006 ) found no evidence that 1 ) vigilantism moderates the relationship between trust and policy support and 2 ) that there is variation across states .
Therefore , we proceed to test this relationship aggregated across states .
However , future research may uncover state or regional differences as theorized by Zimring ( 2003 ) .
336 RAMIREZ describes the measurement of the independent variables and estimation of punitive sentiment via an error-correction model .
MEASURING PUNITIVE SENTIMENT The survey record provides an empirical foundation for gauging the shift in punitive sentiment over time .
For instance , the Gallup organization has asked Americans , “ Are you in favor of the death penalty for a person con- victed of murder ? ” a total of 45 times since 1936 .
Yet , the question has not been asked on a regular basis .
Instead , it appears sporadically from year to year with sizable gaps between administrations , making it unusable for any systematic analysis of opinion toward the death penalty .
Moreover , even if such a question were asked on a regular basis , it would only capture opin- ions on a single issue—one aspect of punitiveness .
Such an analysis fails to capture public sentiment regarding other aspects of punitiveness such as the toughness of courts , the authority of law enforcement , and the role of prisons .
Fortunately , support for capital punishment is not the only question pollsters have asked in regard to punitive policies .
Pollsters have asked about policies such as rehabilitation , the toughness of courts , three-strikes laws , and increasing the authority of law enforcement—questions that when taken together can provide a more complete portrait of the public ’ s puni- tiveness .
It is likely that these questions measure a common phenomena— the degree to which the public supports punitive policies in the abstract .
In fact , each question can be thought of as being composed of two sources of variation .
The first source of variation is related to the public ’ s latent sup- port for punitive policies .
This variation is needed to develop a measure of punitive sentiment .
The second source is variation that is indicator specific .
This variation is attributed to survey effects ( i.e. , differences in question wording and interviewer effects ) along with variation connected to the sup- port for the specific policy—sans the individual ’ s overall support or oppo- sition toward punitive policies .
The problem facing researchers amounts to extracting the indicator-specific variance from the common variance related to the latent concept of punitive sentiment—variance that is shared across multiple indicators .
Does a common component underlie different indicators of public sup- port for punitive policies ?
If the concept of punitive sentiment is valid , then indicators of specific punitive policies should move together across time .
If the concept of punitive sentiment is meaningless , then each policy-specific indicator should move randomly across time independent of each other .
The top panel of figure 1 plots the percentage of citizens providing a more punitive response to four questions relating to different punitive policies : support for capital punishment , tougher judicial sentencing , increasing the PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 337 F ig ur e 1 .
D yn am ic s of P un it iv e Se nt im en tA cr os s T im e an d Sp ec ifi c In di ca to rs 19 70 19 80 19 90 20 00 -3-2-1012 S h ar ed m o ve m en t o f fo u r in d ic at o rs o f p u n it iv e se n ti m en t Y ea r Punitiveness ( standardized ) C rim e sp en di ng La w e nf or ce m en t C ap ita l p un is hm en t Ju di ci al s en te nc in g 19 50 19 60 19 70 19 80 19 90 20 00 505560 P u n it iv e se n ti m en t , 1 95 1 to 2 00 6 Y ea r Punitiveness F ur m an v .
G eo rg ia ' 6 4 E le ct io n O m ni bu s C rim e B ill ' 6 7 R io ts R ea ga n In au gu ra tio n K ef au ve r C om m itt ee 338 RAMIREZ authority of law enforcement , and increasing spending for tougher police enforcement.2 The responses to each of these questions are standardized , shown as deviations from their mean , which allows a more straightforward comparison .
In addition , a moving average index of all four of these stan- dardized indicators is shown alongside the survey marginals to provide a sense of the shared variation across these measures .
In each instance , higher values represent a more punitive response .
The top panel of figure 1 shows that the items exhibit similar movement despite measuring different aspects of criminal justice policy .
Public support for all four policies increased during the 1970s , plateaued in 1994 , and de- clined afterward .
Although the absolute values of each question differ , the relative changes within each item move in tandem .
The Pearson correlation among the death penalty , judicial sentencing , and crime spending measures range from .80 to .88 , whereas the law enforcement item correlates with the death penalty item at .64 , the judicial item at .61 , and the crime spending item at .84 .
Although there is variation unique to each indicator , a common element moves support toward each of these policies .
The index combin- ing each item takes us beyond visual associations of the data and shows the possibility for a common dimension of punitive sentiment .
Underlying each of these four indicators seems to be a common ele- ment .
However , a moving average index of four issues does not capture the broader concept of punitive sentiment .
Punitive sentiment is more ex- tensive than support for any specific policy .
It encompasses support toward all criminal justice policies .
Second , the moving average does not account for differences across questions as a result of survey effects ( Schuman and Presser , 1981 ) .
Differences in question wording , response options , and sur- vey sampling techniques can all create artificial differences in polling re- sults that make the absolute values of survey marginals incomparable across questions .
Finally , a moving average fails to account for missing data be- cause of the infrequent administration of each question .
Tackling these problems requires the use of a “ recursive dyadic domi- nance algorithm ” ( Stimson , 1999 ) , akin to a dynamic factor analysis with 2 .
The questions regarding police spending and law enforcement authority are from the GSS , whereas the questions regarding capital punishment are taken from the Gallup Poll .
The judicial sentencing responses come from both the GSS and the Gallup Poll .
The data were obtained from the Roper Center Public Opinion Archive .
Question details are provided in appendix A of the online supporting information .
Additional supporting information can be found in the listing for this article in the Wiley Online Library at http : //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1745–9125.12006/crim.2011.51.issue- 2/issuetoc .
PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 339 missing data .
First , a reliable and valid indicator of the concept of puni- tive sentiment would consist of all questions asking Americans about some aspect of the punitiveness of the criminal justice system rather than the few issues discussed earlier .
A search of the Roper Center Public Opinion Archive reveals that 24 distinct survey questions were asked at least two or more times between 1951 and 2006 .
These questions cover the most impor- tant and visible punitive policies in regard to public opinion during this time because they are the policies pollsters felt most compelled to ask about .
These questions range from support for capital punishment to tougher law enforcement , the role of prisons , support for rehabilitation , increasing drug penalties , and favoring tougher judicial sentencing .
Overall , we can lever- age information from 242 administrations of 24 different survey items re- lating to public support for punitive policies .
Thus , we have raw data of public support for a broad spectrum of punitive policies to create a mea- sure of punitive sentiment that is more reliable than measuring support for any specific policy.3 Second , the recursive dyadic algorithm extracts the shared variation across questions ( i.e. , issues ) from the indicator-specific variance removing question-specific variation and idiosyncratic error .
The methodology rests on the reasonable assumption that a survey indicator is comparable with itself at different time points .
Then , we can express each survey marginal ( i.e. , the percentage of respondents favoring a more punitive policy ) as a ratio to some fixed point—the initial or final administration of the question .
Expressing each indicator as a ratio places the different survey questions on a common metric of ratios .
Although the absolute values of survey marginals are incomparable across indicators , the ratio of change across indicators is comparable because ratios are on a common metric .
Therefore , if more people prefer a punitive solution on I indicators at time t relative to some previous period t – k , then we can say the public became more punitive on those indicators between time t and t – k.4 Comparable metrics ( in ratios ) now permit averaging across questions ( i.e. , issues ) .
The procedure then derives to a simple averaging process across all issues I 3 .
All survey questions are from nationally representative samples of the U.S. adult population .
Only survey questions asked two or more times can be used because the methodology relies on the ratio of change within an indicator .
Questions mea- suring support for gun regulation are not included in the index because they are more of a preventative than a punitive means of addressing crime .
Including gun control questions in the index does not alter the conclusions of this research .
4 .
Changes in survey marginals could be a result of sampling error , but if the pattern of change is consistent across multiple indicators , then sampling error should be ruled out as an explanation .
An exponential smoother is added to the algorithm to account for differences in sampling error across surveys .
340 RAMIREZ available for period t and all available dyadic comparisons J for issue i : sentiment = n∑ i=1 t∑ j=1 u2i × issuei j issueib × Mb n where b is the base period for the recursive metric generation and Mb is the value of the metric for period b .
The algorithm starts by setting issues in the period t on a common metric of ratios from time t to t – 1 .
It then estimates the latent concept recursively , reestimating the series from period t – 1 until it reestimates the series n times for all t to t – k. The algorithm then reestimates the series using forward recursion from time t – k to time t. The algorithm also estimates the association between each issue and the latent variable as in a factor analysis .
The weight ui2 is an estimate of asso- ciation of each issue with the latent variable—the common variance shared between each question ( i.e. , issue ) .
The backward and forward recursion process also provides estimation and imputation of missing points in the series leveraging on the large amount of data that is available .
Missing ratios within an individual question are imputed based on the weighted average of the ratios that are observable in the data .
If a single indicator is unavailable at time t , but I indicators show an increase from time t to t + 1 , then the final index will show an increase in proportion to the weight ui2 of I indicators to the latent variable .
The methodology has been validated and used to study a wide range of politi- cal opinions such as the movement over time in public liberalism ( Stimson , 1999 ) , political trust ( Keele , 2007 ) , congressional approval ( Durr , Gilmour , and Wolbrecht , 1997 ; Ramirez , 2009 ) , and racial policy preferences ( Kellstedt , 2003 ) .
The punitive sentiment index is generated using all 242 administrations of 24 different survey questions using the dyadic ratios algorithm implemented in the open-source WCalc software .
The bottom panel of figure 1 shows the longitudinal measure of punitive sentiment for the years 1951 to 2006 .
Higher values indicate greater public support for punitive policies .
Several historical events are labeled alongside the index as reference points .
Several scholars have suggested that the public permanently favors punitive solutions to crime ( Freiberg , 2001 ; Garland , 1996 ; Sutton , 1997 ) .
Zimring , Hawkins , and Kamin ( 2001 : 178 ) , for instance , noted that public support for punitive policies is a “ historical constant. ” In contrast , the in- dex shows a dynamic public sentiment .
Punitive sentiment moves slowly over time with few periods of abrupt change , but it does move .
Support begins relatively high in 1951 and shows a steady decline thereafter .
Con- trary to some accounts , punitive sentiment remains low after the Goldwater PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 341 Table 1 .
Commonality of Indicators with the Punitive Sentiment Index Survey House Item Observations Commonality with Index Gallup Judicial sentencing 7 .84 GSS Judicial sentencing 26 .83 Harris Death penalty 12 .94 Gallup Death penalty 42 .93 Gallup Death penalty ( under 21 ) 3 –.53 Gallup Death penalty ( options 1 ) 11 .63 Gallup Death penalty ( options 2 ) 8 .80 Gallup Increase death penalty 6 –.71 Harris Death penalty or prison 3 .85 Harris Death penalty depends 3 –.42 LA Times Death penalty 2 –1.00 GSS Death penalty 26 .92 Harris Death penalty for rape 2 1.00 Gallup Death penalty for rape 4 .83 ABC Increase prisons 3 –1.00 Harris Purpose of prisons 3 .99 Roper Purpose of prisons 3 .91 Roper Law enforcement authority 3 .95 Gallup/LA Times Law enforcement authority 8 .26 Roper Tougher sentencing 3 .85 GSS/Roper Crime spending 40 .70 GSS Law enforcement spending 16 .63 ABC Three-strikes law 2 1.00 Gallup Drug laws 6 .05 NOTES : Appendix A in the online supporting information contains the exact question word- ing of each indicator .
All indicators are taken from nationally representative samples within the United States from the Roper Center Public Opinion Archive .
campaign in 1964 and the enactment of the Civil Rights Act ( 1964 ) .
The large upturn in punitive sentiment occurs during the 1970s , after the tumul- tuous events of the 1960s and prior to the war on drugs in the 1980s .
Punitive sentiment remains at a high equilibrium during the 1980s until 1997 when it experiences a decline back to similar levels as the 1950s .
Overall , the public generally favors punitive policies , but there are periods when the public is more or less supportive of punitive solutions to crime .
Examining the correlation among the individual survey indicators and the index of punitive sentiment provides additional evidence of the valid- ity of the measure .
Each indicator should have a strong relationship with the final index if the individual indicators represent some aspect of punitive sentiment .
Table 1 shows the commonality of each indicator to the final in- dex of punitive sentiment .
The commonalities , ui2 , are equivalent to factor loadings .
Almost all items have a positive commonality with the final in- dex .
Fifteen of the 24 items have a commonality of .80 or higher .
Even the desire to increase spending on crime , an attitude that might relate more to 342 RAMIREZ ideology than punitive preferences , shows a commonality with the index at .70 .
These results suggest that support for each of these distinct policies moves in response to this common underlying national punitive sentiment and that the index is capturing this shared movement .
MEASUREMENT OF INDEPENDENT VARIABLES Punitive sentiment should change in response to the political construc- tion of crime by national political leaders .
Although state and local political actors are important in fostering support for punitive policies among their local ( and sometimes national ) constituencies at specific periods of time , these subnational leaders rarely sustained influence on the crime issue over the entire time period of analysis .
Instead , this research focuses on presi- dential framing of crime because the president is one of the few political actors who has constant national visibility across the entire time period of interest .
The president also has the ability to set the political agenda for the nation ( Neustadt , 1990 ) .
Although it is clear the president does not repre- sent the complete construction of crime , he should serve as the best proxy for the multitude of politics actors that engaged in the construction of crime .
By focusing on the president , this analysis provides a conservative estimate of the effect of frames.5 To measure the construction of crime , this research analyzes all presi- dential statements regarding “ crime ” or “ criminal behavior. ” The data are taken from the Public Papers of the President compiled by the Office of the Federal Register , National Archives , and Records Administration .
Each sentence mentioning “ crime ” or “ criminal behavior ” was coded as fitting the permissive frame , the treatment frame , or neither frame .
The permis- sive frame connects statements about the “ coddling ” of criminals with the need for tougher crime policies .
For example , Nixon ’ s statement that “ when permissive judges are more considerate of the pusher than they are of his victims , there is little incentive for heroin pushers to obey the law ” pro- vides an example of framing crime as a problem of a permissive criminal justice system .
This finding is consistent with Beckett and Sasson ’ s ( 2004 : 78 ) statement that “ the most common frame treats crime as a consequence of the failures of the criminal justice system : Criminals escape punishment because of legal technicalities , liberal judges , and permissive laws. ” State- ments regarding the need to deal with crime by supporting policies such as 5 .
This does not assume that everyone will follow the president ’ s lead .
Members of the opposing party are likely to disapprove of the president ’ s message , whereas members of the president ’ s party are more likely to approve of the message , thus , canceling each other out in the aggregate .
However , responsiveness among a single subgroup ( i.e. , moderates ) can translate into aggregate shifts in punitive sentiment .
PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 343 Figure 2 .
Net Punitive Tone of Presidential Statements on Punishment 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 -4 0 -2 0 0 20 40 60 Year N et -T on e Eisenhower J.F.K .
Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan Bush Clinton G.W .
Bush drug treatment , education , or welfare ( within the context of crime or pun- ishment ) would fall into the treatment frame .
President Johnson ’ s state- ment that “ we can not tolerate an endless , self-defeating cycle of impris- onment ” or President Clinton ’ s view that “ we have to do more to prevent [ crime ] from occurring in the first place ” are examples of a treatment frame .
The number of pro-punitive ( permissive ) statements minus the number of treatment statements is used to create a measure of the net punitive tone of presidential statements regarding crime .
The measure of net punitive tone is shown in figure 2 .
Higher values on the y-axis indicate a more punitive stance among the president .
The series shows few surprises : Nixon and Reagan took a pro-punitive tone , whereas Johnson and Carter focused on treating the social origins of crime .
Clinton , however , deviated from partisan expectations by taking a pro-punitive tone .
The data are consistent with an independent content analysis conducted by Holian ( 2004 ) , who also noted that Clinton took a “ tough-on-crime ” ap- proach during his first term but started to balance his statements after gain- ing credibility on the issue .
Also , an expectation exists that punitive sentiment may change in re- sponse to shifts in the public ’ s trust in political institutions and leaders .
Keele ( 2007 ) developed an index of the nation ’ s overall trust in government composed of responses to nine survey questions asked repeatedly between 1970 and 2000 .
The index aggregates the public ’ s perception of the govern- ment to “ do the right thing , ” “ do a good job , ” “ waste taxes , ” and succumb 344 RAMIREZ to the influence of “ special interest ” groups , in addition to questions mea- suring the public ’ s general trust toward the government .
Higher values on the index represent higher levels of diffuse trust in government .
This re- search extends this measure to span from 1951 to 2006 .
Punitive sentiment also may change in response to changing support for social welfare programs .
The attack on social welfare programs as a solution to the nation ’ s crime problem is expected to correlate with an increase in punitive sentiment .
I use Stimson ’ s ( 1999 ) measure of policy liberalism as an indicator of public support for social welfare programs .
The measure combines public responses of support for a broad range of welfare policy programs such as food stamps , health care , education , and aid to the poor .
Higher values on the policy liberalism index represent greater support for social welfare policies .
No single measure best captures the numerous ways race may affect puni- tive sentiment over time .
Instead , this research relies on several measures to test different predictions regarding the role of race and punitive sentiment .
First , it controls for the amount of reported crime committed by Blacks with the percentage of crimes committed by “ negroes ” or “ Blacks ” each year as reported by the Federal Bureau of Investigation ’ s ( FBI ’ s ) Uniform Crime Reports ( UCR ) program .
In addition , the model controls for changes in both objective and subjec- tive racial conditions .
According to racial threat theory , White Americans should become more supportive of punitive policies the more they per- ceive society becoming integrated .
Racial integration perceptions are mea- sured using a subset of questions regarding perceptions of racial integration taken from Kellstedt ’ s ( 2003 ) index of racial policy preferences ( questions measuring government programs to aid Blacks have been removed ) .
The measure combines questions concerning perceptions of integration in areas such as schools and housing .
Next , an objective measure of racial integra- tion was created by combining U.S. Census data on the percentage of racial minorities in the population and schools relative to the White population .
The models also control for racial crime coverage by measuring the fre- quency with which Blacks are included in Newsweek stories about crime .
These data also derive from Kellstedt ( 2003 ) .6 Punitive sentiment also may be responsive to policy changes .
When pol- icy becomes too permissive , the public may ask for more punitive policies 6 .
Of course , Newsweek does not represent all media coverage and is a sample of convenience because it is available over the entire time period of interest , is na- tional in scope , and has maintained a major position among news magazines across time .
Kellstedt ( 2003 ) showed that Newsweek coverage correlates with other ma- jor media outlets such as the New York Times ; however , it may not represent all forms of media such as the Internet or partisan media sources .
PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 345 and vice versa .
No single indicator of the punitiveness of criminal justice policy exists .
However , annual state and federal incarceration rates capture the commitment of a variety of public officials : law enforcement personnel , prosecutors , judges , and legislators .
The analysis uses the incarceration rate per 100,000 citizens in state and federal prisons taken from the Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics published by the Bureau of Justice Statistics .
The number of incarcerations is not entirely a function of the punitiveness of public officials .
Instead , the more crimes that are committed , the more people are likely to be incarcerated .
Controlling for crime in the statistical model should minimize this concern .
Wilson ( 1975 ) argued that demand for punitive policies reflects a rational response to increases in street crime .
When crime increases , the public de- mands punitive policies as a solution to the problem .
This model includes the national homicide rate from the FBI ’ s UCR to control for crime condi- tions .
Estimating the models with the UCR crime index does not alter the conclusions .
The model also controls for public concern about crime using the percentage of respondents each year naming crime as the nation ’ s “ most important problem ” taken from the Policy Agenda ’ s Project.7 Separate measures for the proportion of Republicans in state legislatures and the proportion of Republican governors also are included in the model .
Although it is difficult to capture all the nuances of state politics and state actors on punitive sentiment across such a long period of time , increases in Republican state governments should partly reflect a more punitive tone of subnational actors .
Moreover , the composition of state legislators , unlike budgets or rhetoric , is one of the few measures that is consistent across each state since the 1950s .
These data are derived from Klarner ( 2003 ) .
Next , the model controls for drug usage across time combining three mea- sures into an additive index .
First , the index includes the number of “ nar- cotics ” arrests per 100,000 citizens as reported in Crime in the United States to control for overall drug usage .
Second , it includes the number of drug fatalities each year , which provides a means to control the intensity of drug usage ( more intense drug usage results in more fatalities ) .8 Finally , it in- cludes the amount of cocaine seizures ( in lbs ) by the Drug Enforcement Agency available in the Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics .
This con- trols for the crack-cocaine epidemic because there is no specific measure of crack-cocaine usage across time .
The Cronbach reliability coefficient for the index is .82 , suggesting these indicators measure a common phenomenon .
7 .
More information about the policy agenda project can be found at http : // www.policyagendas.org/ .
8 .
These data are available from the Center for Disease Control Mortality Database and Vital Statistics of the United States for the categories “ Drug Dependence , ” “ Dependence Syndrome , ” and “ Other Drug Addiction. ” 346 RAMIREZ To control for the possibility that exonerations influence punitive senti- ment , the model includes the number of exonerated death row inmates each year .
Research has suggested that the increase of exonerations has reduced support for the death penalty ( Baumgartner , De Boef , and Boydstun , 2008 ; Unnever and Cullen , 2005 ) , which might generalize to punitive policies ( but see Peffley and Hurwitz , 2007 ) .
Death row exonerations are used because data are readily available and such exonerations are more likely to be visible to the public .
These data are compiled from the Innocence List , the Death Penalty Information Center List of Exonerated Death Row Inmates , the Center for Wrongful Convictions , and the Innocence Project .
ESTIMATION AND RESULTS Punitive sentiment is estimated using a single-equation error-correction model ( ECM ) ( Davidson et al. , 1978 ) .
The ECM assumes that punitive sen- timent exists at a stable equilibrium with short-term movements occurring in response to changes in weakly exogenous independent variables .
How- ever , disequilibrium may exist between punitive sentiment and movement in each independent variable leading to a long-term readjustment in puni- tive sentiment .
In the bivariate case , the ECM is : Yt = α0 + α1Yt −1 + β0Xt + β1 Xt−1 + et where changes in punitive sentiment ( Yt ) are a function of a constant ( α0 ) , the past value of punitive sentiment ( α1 Yt−1 ) , the changes ( β0 Xt ) and lagged level ( β1Xt−1 ) of a weakly exogenous variable X , and an error term ( et ) ; is the difference operator .
The error correction coefficient α1 indi- cates the speed of return to equilibrium of punitive sentiment after a de- viation from its equilibrium with X , β0 reflects the short-term shift from a change in X , and β1 indicates the long-term relationship between X and Y .
The ECM has several advantages over alternative models for estimating time-series data .
First , it estimates directly both short-term and long-term relationships between each covariate and punitive sentiment .
The estima- tion allows for the calculation of unique decay rates for each variable rather than assumes a common rate of decay .
Second , it provides efficient estima- tion in the presence of nonstationary variables ( De Boef , 2000 ; De Boef and Granato , 1997 ) .9 The ECM also allows for various lag structures .
The 9 .
The measures for incarcerations , drug usage , exonerations , and the racial integra- tion index exhibited trend nonstationarity , which was removed using the Hodrick– Prescott filter .
A series of stationarity tests shows no consistent evidence of drift , trends , or random walks in the changes of the other variables ( shown in appendix B in the online supporting information ) .
PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 347 Table 2 .
Error Correction Estimation of Punitive Sentiment Variables Model 1 SE Model 2 SE Model 3 SE Punitive sentimentt−1 –.38∗ ( .07 ) –.29∗ ( .09 ) –.40∗ ( .10 ) Homicide rate .60 ( .50 ) 1.05† ( .54 ) .53 ( .52 ) Homicide ratet−1 .39∗ ( .18 ) .34† ( .17 ) .49∗ ( .20 ) Crime concern 6.81† ( 3.63 ) 8.36† ( 3.63 ) 8.34† ( 3.93 ) Crime concernt−1 .28 ( 3.32 ) –.31 ( 3.29 ) 1.62 ( 4.16 ) Incarceration rate .02 ( .06 ) .09 ( .07 ) .01 ( .07 ) Incarcerations ratet−1 –.01 ( .10 ) .05 ( .10 ) –.02 ( .11 ) Drug use 4.52∗ ( 1.90 ) 5.01∗ ( 1.87 ) 4.65∗ ( 2.14 ) Drug uset−1 8.20∗ ( 3.06 ) 7.36∗ ( 3.03 ) 9.41∗ ( 3.31 ) Exonerations .11 ( .08 ) .19 ( .09 ) .12 ( .11 ) Exonerationst−1 .18 ( .10 ) .26 ( .12 ) .17 ( .16 ) Net punitive tone .06∗ ( .02 ) .07∗ ( .02 ) .06∗ ( .02 ) Net punitive tonet−1 .06∗ ( .02 ) .05∗ ( .02 ) .07∗ ( .03 ) Trust in government –.09 ( .07 ) –.07 ( .07 ) –.07 ( .08 ) Trust in governmentt−1 –.04 ( .06 ) –.07 ( .07 ) –.01 ( .08 ) Public liberalism –.10 ( .09 ) –.09 ( .09 ) –.06 ( .12 ) Public liberalismt−1 –.22∗ ( .08 ) –.18∗ ( .08 ) –.23† ( .09 ) Governor balance –1.24 ( 3.48 ) –2.77 ( 3.52 ) –1.24 ( 3.94 ) Governor balancet−1 –6.77 ( 3.86 ) –8.17 ( 3.89 ) –7.04 ( 4.23 ) State legislature balance 1.22† ( .73 ) 1.34† ( .73 ) 1.19 ( .84 ) State legislature balancet−1 1.38† ( .81 ) 1.53† ( .79 ) 1.38 ( .97 ) Black crime –1.06† ( .50 ) –1.27∗ ( .51 ) –1.29 ( .79 ) Black crimet−1 –1.17 ( 1.03 ) –1.58 ( 1.02 ) –3.83 ( 6.30 ) Racial integration perceptions .29∗ ( .10 ) .29∗ ( .10 ) .30∗ ( .14 ) Racial integration perceptionst−1 –.01 ( .08 ) –.02 ( .09 ) –.01 ( .08 ) Racial media frames — — –.01 ( .01 ) — — Racial media framest−1 — — –.01 ( .01 ) — — Racial integration index — — — — –4.82 ( 8.30 ) Racial integration indext−1 — — — — .67 ( 1.92 ) Intercept 30.31∗ ( 6.96 ) 24.93∗ ( 8.21 ) 29.61∗ ( 7.15 ) R2 .77 — .79 — .79 — NOTES : The coefficients represent the change in punitive sentiment from a unit shift in each variable .
Standard errors ( SE ) are shown in parentheses .
is the first-difference operator .
N = 55 for models 1 and 2 .
N = 53 for model 3 .
None of the models show signs of higher or- dered autocorrelation or autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity ( ARCH ) disturbances .
†p < .10 ; ∗p < .05 .
Bayesian information criterion ( BIC ) statistic suggests a single lag struc- ture for each variable provides the best fit to the data ( see appendix B in the online supporting information for details ) .
Model 1 in table 2 shows the estimates of punitive sentiment from 1951 to 2006 .
Consistent with Beckett ( 1997 ) , punitive sentiment moves in response to statements framing crime as a problem of a permissive system ( which she referred to as the “ respect for authority ” frame ) .
The coefficient on the net punitive tone of presidential statements is positive and statistically significant .
The ECM provides new insight into the dynamics between pres- idential tone and punitive sentiment .
A single statement by the president is 348 RAMIREZ estimated to increase punitive sentiment by an immediate .06 points .
Puni- tive sentiment will increase another .06 points during the next year .
More- over , it will continue to shift at a rate determined by the error-correction coefficient ( α1 ) until it changes a total of .16 points ( total change = ß1/α1 ) .
This suggests that presidential statements about crime have a stickiness or persistence in shaping how citizens think about solutions to crime .
Although the estimates seem small , presidential tone can have a sizable influence on punitive sentiment .
A standard deviation ( SD ) change in pres- idential tone ( SD = 14.36 statements ) is estimated to result in an immediate .86 point shift in punitive sentiment and in a total shift of 1.72 points .
The latter is about half a standard deviation in the punitive sentiment series and bolsters the important relationship between punitive sentiment and the po- litical construction of crime .
These results deviate from existing microlevel cross-sectional research regarding the effect of crime and concern for crime on support for puni- tive policies ( Cohn , Barkan , and Halteman , 1991 ; Langworthy and White- head , 1986 ; Secret and Johnson , 1989 ; Tyler and Weber , 1982 ; Warr , 1995 ) .
Beckett ( 1997 : 25–7 ) summarized this perspective , concluding that the “ risk of or anxiety of criminal victimization can not explain support for tough an- ticrime policies. ” Contrary to this view , public concern for crime shows a positive and statistically significant relationship with punitive sentiment .
This finding is consistent with Scheingold ’ s ( 1984 ) assessment that puni- tive policies may provide a sense of security to those who are frightened about crime .
A percentage increase in public concern is estimated to in- crease punitive sentiment by 6.81 points .
Although this change seems sub- stantial , public concern for crime never changes an entire percentage point in the time period under analysis .
The standard deviation shift in public con- cern for crime between 1951 and 2006 is .08 points , suggesting the average shift in punitive sentiment from crime concern is a much more modest .54 points .
The largest shift in public concern or crime ( .19 points ) occurs from 1993 to 1994 .
This finding translates into an immediate 1.29 point shift in punitive sentiment during the last peak in the punitive sentiment series .
Beckett ( 1997 : 25–7 ) also suggested that the role of crime and drug con- ditions is to provide legitimacy to the political construction of crime .
In- teracting presidential tone with the homicide rate and the drug usage mea- sure failed to show a statistically significant conditional effect ( results are available from the author ) .
However , table 1 shows that a point increase in the homicide rate is estimated to increase punitive sentiment directly by .39 points .
Although the estimated relationship seems large , the homicide rate does not move very much on a year-to-year basis , suggesting the ac- tual estimated relationship between punitive sentiment and homicides is more modest .
Whereas a standard deviation shift in the net punitive tone PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 349 shifts punitive sentiment 1.72 points , a standard deviation in the homicide rate ( SD = 2.00 ) only shifts punitive sentiment by .78 points .
Moreover , the effect of homicides on punitive sentiment is not immediate .
Instead , the public slowly updates its preferences when crime conditions change .
This finding is consistent with Mayer ’ s ( 1993 ) estimate of aggregate support for capital punishment lagging several years behind the homicide rate .
Substan- tively , this result suggests that it takes time for the public to receive , process , and update information about crime before updating its policy preferences .
Failure to consider this temporal process can obfuscate the reaction of citi- zens to crime on the streets .
In addition , increases in drug usage show an immediate and long-term relationship with punitive sentiment .
The coefficient for the short-term changes and the lagged levels in drug usage are positive and statistically significant .
The latter is consistent with the expectation that drug usage , particularly the rise of crack cocaine , is correlated with public support for punitive policies ( Beckett , 1997 ; Blumstein , 2003 ; Kautt and Spohn , 2002 ) .
The estimates fail to show a relationship between trust and punitive senti- ment .
Instead , it seems that a lack of public support for government welfare policies , rather than a decline in trust , correlates with changes in punitive sentiment .
A unit decrease in support for welfare policies results in a lagged .22 point decrease in punitive sentiment .
Substantively , a standard deviation change in public liberalism ( 4.69 points ) results in a total 1.03 point shift in punitive sentiment—slightly less than the effect that presidential tone has on punitive sentiment .
This finding suggests that the attack on social lib- eralism was a successful strategy for increasing public support for punitive crime control policies .
The composition of state legislatures also shows a statistically significant relationship with punitive sentiment .
An increase in the number of Republi- can state legislatures results in an immediate and long-term change in puni- tive sentiment .
The composition of state governors does not seem to have an influence on national punitive sentiment .
Incarcerations also fail to show a relationship with punitive sentiment .
Including only the federal incarcer- ation rate does not alter the results .
The model also shows a statistically significant relationship between per- ceptions of racial integration and punitive sentiment .
A shift in public per- ceptions that racial integration is increasing results in an immediate .29 point increase in punitive sentiment .
A standard deviation shift in racial integration perceptions ( SD = 4.47 ) results in a total 1.29 point shift in puni- tive sentiment , which is larger than the effect of presidential tone or public liberalism .
Model 2 in table 2 includes the measure of stories connecting Blacks to crime in Newsweek .
The results are largely consistent with model 1—presidential tone , public liberalism , drug usage , crime conditions , 350 RAMIREZ public concern for crime , and perceptions of racial integration influence punitive sentiment .
However , racial crime coverage does not show a statis- tically significant relationship with punitive sentiment .
Of course , this could be a function of the limitations with the measure .
Model 3 in table 2 replaces the measure of racial crime coverage with a measure of objective racial in- tegration .
Although the rest of the coefficient estimates are consistent with the preceding results , objective racial integration seems to play little role in shaping punitive sentiment .
Rather , it is the public ’ s perceptions of those conditions that matters .
By altering public perceptions of racial integra- tion , political entrepreneurs have another route to promote tough-on-crime policies .
The ECM assumes the independent variables are weakly exogenous to punitive sentiment ( Davidson et al. , 1978 ; De Boef , 2000 ) .
Several tests were conducted that demonstrated conditions that violate this assumption .
De Boef ( 2000 ) showed that this assumption may be violated if the au- toregressive integrated moving average ( ARIMA ) innovations from each covariate are strongly correlated with the residuals from the ECM .
Table 3 shows the Pearson correlation r for the ARIMA innovations from each covariate shown in the first column with the residuals from model 1 in table 2 .
None of the ARIMA innovations show a strong correlation with the residuals from the model , which is consistent with the weak exogeneity assumption .
Table 3 also shows the results of regressing the lagged levels of punitive sentiment on the ARIMA innovations of each covariate shown in column 1 .
In the absence of knowing the true data-generating process of each co- variate , the ARIMA innovations provide the best estimate of each series ( De Boef , 2000 ) .
The coefficient under punitive sentiment represents the relationship of punitive sentiment on each covariate while controlling for the inherent ARIMA movement in each series .
None of the estimates show a relationship with punitive sentiment , which is consistent with the weak ex- ogeneity assumption ( Charemza and Deadman , 1997 : 264–6 ) .
Table 3 also shows that punitive sentiment explains little , if any , of the variance of each independent variable as indicated by the R-squared column .
Finally , table 3 shows the results of a Granger causality test .
The vector autoregression equation estimated the incarceration rate , exonerations , public liberalism , and presidential tone as endogenous to punitive sentiment while control- ling for the other covariates in the model because it is unlikely that crime conditions , drug usage , or racial integration respond to punitive sentiment directly .
None of the p values are statistically significant , suggesting puni- tive sentiment does not cause any of the potentially endogenous covariates in the model .
Of course , these tests do not eliminate the potential for more complex relationships , but the results are consistent with the assumption necessary for efficient and unbiased estimation .
PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 351 Table 3 .
Exogeneity Tests of Independent Variables Dependent Variables Granger Independent Variablea Causalityb Punitive r Sentimentt–1 SE R2 p < Homicide rate .12 –.01 ( .01 ) .02 — Crime concern .00 .01 ( .01 ) .01 — Incarceration rate .00 .04 ( .02 ) .01 .66 Drug usage .00 .01 ( .01 ) .00 — Exonerations .05 .05 ( .05 ) .02 .09 Net punitive tone .00 .23 ( .20 ) .02 .09 Trust in government .01 –.07 ( .08 ) .01 — Public liberalism .07 –.04 ( .04 ) .01 .84 Black crime –.13 .01 ( .01 ) .00 — Racial integration perceptions .03 –.04 ( .04 ) .02 — Racial integration index –.03 .01 ( .01 ) .01 — Governor balance –.00 .01 ( .01 ) .01 — State legislature balance –.00 .01 ( .01 ) .01 — NOTES : The r value shows the Pearson correlation coefficient r between the residuals of model 1 and the ARIMA innovations of each variable shown in column 1 .
None of the rela- tionships show a strong correlation consistent with the weak exogeneity assumption ( De Boef , 2000 ) .
aThe coefficients under punitive sentiment represent the lagged effect of punitive sentiment on the movement in each dependent variable in the first column .
SE represents the standard error of that coefficient .
The R2 column shows the percentage of each dependent variable explained by punitive sentiment sans the ARIMA processes of each variable .
N = 56. bThese p values are from a post-VAR Granger causality test .
All p values are consistent with the null hypothesis that punitive sentiment does not Granger cause the dependent variable shown in column 1 .
The VAR includes controls for the homicide rate , crime concern , drug usage , trust in government , state party balance , and all of the race measures .
N = 55 .
The combination of weak exogeneity and the absence of Granger causality is consistent with an assumption of strong exogeneity .
SUBGROUP ANALYSIS Microlevel studies consistently show a great deal of heterogeneity in punitive attitudes among various demographic groups ( Bobo and John- son , 2004 ; Gault and Sabini , 2000 ; Messner , Baumer , and Rosenfeld , 2006 ; Unnever and Cullen , 2005 ) .
Aggregation of punitive sentiment across these groups might obfuscate distinctions in the dynamics of punitive sentiment .
Therefore , measures of punitive sentiment were created for theoretically important subgroups using a subset of indicators from the punitive sen- timent index.10 Figure 3 shows the movement of punitive sentiment for various subgroups .
Panel 1 shows the punitive sentiment of Blacks and 10 .
These indicators derive from the GSS and cover public support for capital punish- ment , tougher courts , increasing the authority of law enforcement , and increasing police resources to fight crime .
Using a subset of indicators is necessary because the complete set of questions used in the index is not available by subgroup .
352 RAMIREZ Figure 3 .
Punitive Sentiment Among Subgroups , 1972 to 2006 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 40 50 60 70 80 90 10 0 Demographic groups Year P un iti ve s en tim en t m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m m w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w w m w Whites Blacks College degree High school or less Men Women R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 50 60 70 80 90 10 0 Partisan groups Year P un iti ve s en tim en t D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D DI I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I R D I Republicans Democrats Independents PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 353 Figure 3 .
Continued .
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 50 60 70 80 90 10 0 Geographic regions Year P un iti ve s en tim en t s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s Mountain West Northeast Midwest Pacific South 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 40 50 60 70 80 90 10 0 Age cohorts Year P un iti ve s en tim en t 18-29 cohort 45-65 cohort 354 RAMIREZ Whites , men and women , and different educational groups move in tandem despite different levels of support .
The correlation of punitive sentiment among men and women is .91 , Blacks and Whites is .78 , and citizens with a high-school degree or less and a college degree is .90 .
Panel 2 shows dif- ferent levels of punitive sentiment across Democrats , Republicans , and In- dependents .
Republican sentiment seems stable , but the correlation over time with the other partisan groups is higher than .77 , indicating that aggregate punitive sentiment does not obfuscate differences in the move- ment of sentiment among partisans .
It is possible that the South exhibits a unique sense of punitiveness rel- ative to other regions of the country ( Garland , 2001 ) .
Panel 3 shows the movement in punitiveness across different regions of the country.11 Each region shows similarity in both levels and movement over time , although the data can not speak to earlier generations .
Finally , some movement in aggregated punitive sentiment might derive from generational replacement rather than from the factors estimated by the model .
Panel 4 shows the dynamics of punitive sentiment for two age cohorts .
One age cohort is com- posed of respondents who were between 18 and 29 years of age in 1972 .
The second cohort is composed of respondents between 45 and 65 years of age in 1972 .
The punitive sentiment of these groups moves together over time contrary to the occurrence of significant generational replacement .
Over- all , these results suggest punitive sentiment is similar across the dominant political cleavages in American politics .
Finally , the relationship among covariates and punitive sentiment might differ for several of these subgroups .
Whites and Blacks have been shown to differ in their support for punitive policies ( Bobo and Johnson , 2004 ) , and it is unlikely that perceptions of racial integration would influence the senti- ment of Blacks .
In addition , because Blacks are more reliant on government social programs , public liberalism should have less of an influence on their support for punitive policies .
Table 4 shows estimates of punitive sentiment for Whites and Blacks .
Presidential tone continues to a show a positive and significant relationship with the punitive sentiment of both of these groups .
However , public liberalism and racial threat are only connected to the puni- tive sentiment of Whites .
Table 4 also shows the estimates of punitive sentiment for Republicans and Democrats because presidential tone might influence these groups in unique ways .
The results , however , show that increases in presidential tone increase the punitive sentiment of both partisan groups .
The key difference among partisans is that decreases in support for liberal social programs 11 .
The South includes both the South Atlantic and South Central regions , the North- east contains the New England and Middle Atlantic regions , and the Midwest con- tains the East North Central and West North Central regions per the GSS coding .
PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 355 T ab le 4 .
E st im at io n of P un it iv e Se nt im en tA cr os s Su bg ro up s V ar ia bl es W hi te s SE B la ck s SE R ep .
SE D em .
SE W om en SE So ut h SE P un it iv e t –1 –1 .0 2∗ ( .
23 ) – .
53 ∗ ( .
23 ) –1 .3 6∗ ( .
17 ) – .
59 ∗ ( .
24 ) – .
53 ∗ ( .
08 ) – .9 3∗ ( .
22 ) H om ic id e ra te .6 1 ( 1 .4 4 ) – .
11 ( .
37 ) .0 9 ( .
58 ) .2 1 ( .
26 ) – .
10 ( .
07 ) .3 9 ( .
30 ) H om ic id e ra te t – 1 – .
33 ∗ ( .
12 ) – .
49 ∗ ( .
18 ) – .
54 ( .
58 ) .1 1 ( .
26 ) – .
84 ( .
73 ) .2 0 ( .
18 ) C ri m e co nc er n .7 0 ( .
82 ) –1 .2 7 ( 1 .7 3 ) – .
21 ( .
27 ) 1 .
78 ( 1 .4 3 ) .3 2 ( .
45 ) 3 .
65 ∗ ( 1 .6 5 ) C ri m e co nc er n t –1 – .
52 ( .
66 ) –1 .0 2 ( 1 .1 5 ) – .
22 ( .
27 ) –3 .6 2 ( 1 .2 6 ) – .
13 ( .
43 ) 2 .
95 ∗ ( 1 .2 7 ) In ca rc er at io n ra te .0 6 ( .
64 ) .9 8 ( 2 .2 4 ) .0 1 ( .
31 ) 1 .
61 ( .
94 ) .1 2 ( .
42 ) .9 7 ( 1 .1 8 ) In ca rc er at io n ra te t – 1 – .
72 † ( .
35 ) .3 7 ( .
45 ) – .
54 ∗ ( .
07 ) – .
28 ( .
44 ) – .
51 ∗ ( .
18 ) –2 .1 2∗ ( .
54 ) D ru g us e – .
55 ( 3 .1 7 ) – .
04 ( 5 .7 9 ) .2 9 ( 1 .1 7 ) 1 .
08 ( .
62 ) 4 .
02 ∗ ( 1 .5 8 ) 1 .
06 ( .
50 ) D ru g us e t –1 – .
90 ( 6 .8 1 ) – .
54 ( 1 .1 4 ) – .
48 ( 2 .1 2 ) 6 .
93 ( 5 .8 4 ) 4 .
42 ( 3 .0 1 ) 2 .
00 ∗ ( .
93 ) E xo ne ra ti on s .1 6 ( .
09 ) – .
35 ( .
28 ) – .
03 ( .
06 ) – .
36 ∗ ( .
12 ) – .
23 ∗ ( .
07 ) – .
04 ( .
30 ) E xo ne ra ti on s t –1 .2 5 ( .
22 ) – .
28 ( .
29 ) – .
03 ( .
06 ) – .
12 ( .
48 ) – .
19 ( .
12 ) .5 1 ( .
40 ) N et pu ni ti ve to ne .0 9† ( .
04 ) .1 7† ( .
08 ) .0 5∗ ( .
02 ) .1 3∗ ( .
05 ) .0 5† ( .
02 ) .1 3† ( .
06 ) N et pu ni ti ve to ne t – 1 .1 8∗ ( .
05 ) .1 8† ( .
09 ) .0 5∗ ( .
02 ) .1 9∗ ( .
06 ) .0 5† ( .
02 ) .2 9∗ ( .
09 ) T ru st in go ve rn m en t – .
06 ( .
15 ) .0 1 ( .
29 ) – .
05 † ( .
02 ) .0 5 ( .
14 ) .0 1 ( .
10 ) – .
62 ∗ ( .
21 ) T ru st in go ve rn m en t t –1 .0 4 ( .
14 ) – .
03 ( .
26 ) – .
02 ( .
01 ) .0 1 ( .
14 ) .1 2 ( .
09 ) .3 8 ( .
33 ) P ub lic lib er al is m – .
07 ( .
29 ) – .
04 ( .
26 ) .0 7 ( .
08 ) – .
11 ( .
20 ) – .
01 ( .
01 ) .0 8 ( .
35 ) P ub lic lib er al is m t – 1 – .
58 ∗ ( .
17 ) – .
13 ( .
13 ) .0 2 ( .
07 ) – .
33 ∗ ( .
14 ) – .
01 ( .
01 ) –1 .1 1∗ ( .
37 ) G ov er no r ba la nc e 1 .
91 † ( .
99 ) .9 4 ( 1 .4 8 ) .4 5 ( .
56 ) .1 8 ( 1 .8 7 ) –1 .1 4 ( .
72 ) 3 .
54 ( 2 .2 8 ) G ov er no r ba la nc e t –1 1 .
64 ( .
94 ) – .
55 ( 2 .1 4 ) – .
71 ( .
53 ) –2 .8 1 ( 2 .9 5 ) –1 .3 9 ( .
84 ) 1 .
33 ( 3 .0 2 ) St at e le gi sl at ur e ba la nc e – .
34 ( .
34 ) – .
39 ( .
98 ) –1 .1 6 ( 1 .5 3 ) .0 5 ( .
45 ) – .
09 ( .
15 ) – .
98 ( .
57 ) St at e le gi sl at ur e ba la nc e t –1 – .
22 ( .
39 ) – .
80 ( 1 .4 3 ) – .
59 ( 1 .3 7 ) .4 1 ( .
48 ) – .
41 † ( .
20 ) –1 .5 5† ( .
72 ) B la ck cr im e .0 2 ( .
09 ) .0 8 ( 1 .4 7 ) .4 7† ( .
22 ) – .
34 ( 1 .3 8 ) .8 9 ( .
60 ) .4 0∗ ( .
17 ) B la ck cr im e t –1 – .
51 ( .
70 ) 1 .
13 ( 1 .9 7 ) .5 9† ( .
28 ) 1 .
36 ( .
69 ) .1 9 ( .
54 ) –1 .8 3 ( 1 .5 6 ) R ac ia li nt eg ra ti on .1 8 ( .
17 ) .1 3 ( .
23 ) .1 5∗ ( .
05 ) .1 7 ( .
12 ) .1 9∗ ( .
08 ) .2 0 ( .
31 ) R ac ia li nt eg ra ti on t – 1 .3 8∗ ( .
18 ) .0 2 ( .
23 ) .0 5∗ ( .
02 ) – .
10 ( .
11 ) .1 6∗ ( .
07 ) .6 0∗ ( .
21 ) R 2 .9 2 — .8 7 — .9 3 — .9 0 — .9 7 — .9 4 — N O T E S : T he de pe nd en tv ar ia bl e is a su bs et of th e pu ni ti ve se nt im en ti nd ex fo r ea ch su bg ro up ,1 97 2 to 20 06 ( N = 34 fo r ea ch m od el ) .
T he co ef fic ie nt s re pr es en t th e ch an ge in pu ni ti ve se nt im en t fr om a un it sh if t in ea ch va ri ab le .N ew ey –W es t st an da rd er ro rs ( S E s ) ar e sh ow n in pa re nt he se s. is th e fir st -d if fe re nc e op er at or .R ep .i nd ic at es R ep ub lic an s , an d D em .i nd ic at es D em oc ra ts .E ac h at ti tu di na l va ri ab le is sp ec ifi c fo r th e gr ou p be in g es ti m at ed .D et ai ls ar e in ap pe nd ix A in th e on lin e su pp or ti ng in fo rm at io n un de r M ea su ri ng Su bg ro up P re fe re nc es .
∗ p < .1 0 ; † p < .0 5 .
356 RAMIREZ increase support for punitive policies among Democrats and not Repub- licans .
The latter likely occurs because Republicans already tend to hold strong opposition toward such programs , leaving little room for change .
Re- publicans do show a relationship between declining levels of trust in govern- ment and declines in support for punitive policies .
Moreover , Republicans are the only partisan group to show a positive and statistically significant relationship between perceptions of racial integration and support for puni- tive policies .
Finally , estimates for women and respondents in the South are shown in table 4 .
Women have been shown to be more compassionate than men ( Piven , 1985 ) , and citizens in the South seem to be more punitive than the rest of the nation ( Garland , 2001 ) .
However , the estimates suggest that these groups respond to many of the same factors as national punitive senti- ment .
Punitive sentiment increases for both groups in response to increases in the punitiveness of presidential statements on crime and increasing per- ceptions of racial integration .
Similar to Republicans , Southern respondents decrease their support for punitive policies when their trust in government declines .
Overall , the results show that pleas to limit the permissiveness of the criminal justice system do not just influence the punitive sentiment of the racially prejudice or those opposed to “ social reform ” ( Beckett , 1997 : 84 ) , but instead these pleas appeal across a variety of subgroups .
CONCLUSION The public ’ s punitive sentiment has been argued to be an important com- ponent of America ’ s criminal justice system ( Beckett , 1997 ; Edsall and Edsall , 1992 ; Frost , 2010 ; Garland , 2001 ; Gottschalk , 2006 ; Schneider , 2006 ; Simon , 2007 ; Tonry , 1995 ; Wilson , 1975 ) .
Yet , capturing this concept in a systematic fashion has eluded researchers .
Instead , most of the focus has been on explaining individual-level punitive attitudes .
This research has developed a measure of punitive sentiment over time from 1951 to 2006 .
In stark contrast to individual-level attitudes , aggregate punitive sentiment shows substantial variation over time .
The movement in punitive sentiment is on par with the movement in public support for social welfare policies ( Stimson , 1999 ) .
This measure illuminates substantial declines in support for punitive policies during the 1950s , 1960s , and late 1990s .
And although most scholars might have anticipated the midseries increase in punitive sen- timent , the measure shows the most substantial increases occurred during the 1970s rather than the 1960s as often is assumed .
Substantively , this re- sult implies that punitive sentiment is not deterministic , and the public may be more open to alternative solutions to crime during certain periods— something that is bolstered by recent support for prison reform by politi- cians across the ideological spectrum .
PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 357 In addition , the measure of punitive sentiment shows that public sup- port toward specific punitive policies , often thought to be independent of each other , move in tandem over time .
Substantively , this creates an easy- to-follow signal for policy makers to follow .
But it is precisely this gen- eral sentiment that often leads policy makers astray from the more com- plex individual-level preferences of the public ( Tonry , 1995 : 34–5 ) .
Follow- ing this sentiment may ignore the more benevolent instincts of Americans and the complex connections among various social policies .
Indeed , this re- search shows a strong connection between public support for social welfare policies and support for punitive solutions to crime .
That the increase in support for punitive policies occurred at the same time as the public turned away from the New Deal and Great Society solutions to poverty is no co- incidence .
Conservative politicians implemented a strategy that connected these issues , along with the civil rights movement , to the coddling of crimi- nals and need for punitive solutions to crime .
Furthermore , these results show the movement in punitive sentiment is far from random .
The ups and downs of punitive sentiment are driven by important political factors such as the construction of crime by political leaders .
The framing of crime as a problem of a permissive system and increasing perceptions of racial integration increased public demand for punitive policies .
Both are normatively unappealing—the former because it suggests the public can be led into supporting unnecessary and costly policies in addition to objective crime conditions , and the latter because it provides a new way of supporting a long-held argument that punitive poli- cies serve as a means of social control of minority populations .
Such policies have led to the mass imprisonment of minorities and destroy valuable social structures , making it difficult for future generations of minorities to succeed ( Rodriguez , Smith , and Zatz , 2009 ; Rose and Clear , 1998 ) .
It should go without saying that these processes are part of a complex system .
The research provided in this article examines a single slice of that system , what explains punitive sentiment , without analyzing more complex causal connections .
Although examining such a slice does not capture the complexity of the system accurately , it does illuminate a portion of the sys- tem related to the determinants of punitive sentiment .
Punitive sentiment , in turn , also may influence the policies enacted by politicians and subse- quently policy outcomes .
Thus , the measure of punitive sentiment should contribute to future research projects that attempt to understand the rela- tionship among various components of the criminal justice system .
More- over , scholars will be able to update the measure as more data become available extending the utility of the measure .
This measure should help develop new insight into critical questions re- garding crime and punishment in America .
For instance , scholars frequently discuss the question of when and why the public became punitive .
At what 358 RAMIREZ time point and for what reason ( s ) did the public begin to shift its support away from treating the social causes of crime to supporting punishing crim- inal behavior ?
Cross-sectional designs can not provide answers regarding change over time .
Qualitative researchers studying the historical record of- ten come to different answers because such evidence is open to interpre- tation .
The measure of punitive sentiment can provide a means to answer these questions with empirical data beyond the models tested in this re- search .
Future research also will be able to examine the political conse- quences of changes in punitive sentiment .
How does punitive sentiment shape judicial decisions and the punitiveness of criminal sentencing ?
Do changes in the toughness of court decisions correlate with changes in puni- tive sentiment ?
Does the increase in punitiveness correspond to a similar in- crease in support for prison privatization , or are these distinct preferences ?
What other aspects of race correlate with changes in punitive sentiment beyond racial integration ?
It should be clear that the research developed in this study is just a small portion of the potential usage of a measure of punitive sentiment over time .
Such a measure should go a long way in help- ing scholars understand the complex nature of America ’ s changing punitive landscape .
REFERENCES Aladjem , Terry K. 2008 .
The Culture of Vengeance and the Fate of American Justice .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
Barkan , Steven E. , and Steven F. Cohn .
1994 .
Racial prejudice and sup- port for the death penalty by whites .
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 31:202–9 .
Barlow , Melissa Hickman .
1998 .
Race and the problem of crime in Time and Newsweek cover stories , 1946 to 1995 .
Social Justice 25:149–83 .
Baumgartner , Frank R. , Suzanna L. De Boef , and Amber E. Boydstun .
2008 .
The Decline of the Death Penalty and the Discovery of Innocence .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
Beckett , Katherine .
1997 .
Making Crime Pay .
New York : Oxford Univer- sity Press .
Beckett , Katherine , and Theodore Sasson .
2004 .
The Politics of Injustice : Crime and Punishment in America .
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .
Blalock , Hubert M. 1967 .
Toward a Theory of Minority-Group Relations .
Hoboken , NJ : Wiley .
PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 359 Blumstein , Alfred .
2003 .
The notorious 100:1 crack : Powder disparity—the data tell us that it is time to restore the balance .
Federal Sentencing Re- porter 16:87–92 .
Bobo , Lawrence D. , and Devon Johnson .
2004 .
A taste for punishment : Black and white Americans ’ views on the death penalty and the war on drugs .
Du Bois Review 1:151–80 .
Charemza , Wojciech W. , and Derek F. Deadman .
1997 .
New Directions in Econometric Practice .
Aldershot , U.K. : Edward Elgar .
Chiricos , Ted , Kelly Welch , and Marc Gertz .
2004 .
Racial typification of crime and support for punitive measures .
Criminology 42:359–89 .
Civil Rights Act of 1964 , Pub .
L. 88–352 , 78 Stat .
241 ( 1964 ) .
Cohn , Steven F. , Steven E. Barkan , and William A. Halteman .
1991 .
Punitive attitudes toward criminals : Racial consensus or racial conflict .
Social Problems 38:287–96 .
Costelloe , Michael T. , Ted Chiricos , and Marc Gertz .
2009 .
Punitive atti- tudes toward criminals .
Punishment & Society 11:25–49 .
Davidson , James E. H. , David F. Hendry , Frank Srba , and Stephen Yeo .
1978 .
Econometric modelling of the aggregate time-series relationships between consumers ’ expenditure and income in the United Kingdom .
The Economic Journal 88:661–92 .
De Boef , Suzanna L. 2000 .
Modeling equilibrium relationships : Error cor- rection models with strongly autoregressive data .
Political Analysis 9:78–94 .
De Boef , Suzanna L , and Jim Granato .
1997 .
Near-integrated data and the analysis of political relationships .
American Journal of Political Science 41:619–40 .
Durr , Robert H. , John B. Gilmour , and Christina Wolbrecht .
1997 .
Ex- plaining congressional approval .
American Journal of Political Science 41:175–207 .
Edsall , Thomas Byrne , and Mary D. Edsall .
1992 .
Chain Reaction .
New York : Norton .
Erskine , Hazel .
1974 .
The polls : Causes of crime .
Public Opinion Quarterly 38:288–98 .
Feeley , Malcolm M. 2003 .
Crime , social order and the rise of neo- conservative politics .
Theoretical Criminology 7:111–30 .
360 RAMIREZ Flamm , Michael W. 2005 .
Law and Order : Street Crime , Civil Unrest , and the Crisis of Liberalism in the 1960s .
New York : Columbia University Press .
Flanagan , Timothy J .
1996 .
Public opinion on crime and justice : History , development , and trends .
In Americans View Crime and Justice : A Na- tional Public Opinion Survey , eds .
Timothy J. Flanagan and Dennis R. Longmire .
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .
Freiberg , Arie .
2001 .
Affective versus effective justice .
Punishment & Soci- ety 3:265–78 .
Frost , Natasha A .
2010 .
Beyond public opinion polls : Punitive public senti- ment and criminal justice policy .
Sociology Compass 4:156–68 .
Garland , David .
1996 .
The limits of the sovereign state : Strategies of crime control in contemporary society .
British Journal of Criminology 36 : 445–71 .
Garland , David .
2001 .
The Culture of Control .
New York : Oxford Univer- sity Press .
Gault , Barbara A. , and John Sabini .
2000 .
The roles of empathy , anger , and gender in predicting attitudes toward punitive , reparative , and preven- tative public policies .
Cognition & Emotion 14:495–520 .
Gottschalk , Marie .
2006 .
The Prison and the Gallows : The Politics of Mass Incarceration in America .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
Holian , David B .
2004 .
He ’ s stealing my issue !
Clinton ’ s crime rhetoric and the dynamics of issue ownership .
Political Behavior 26:95–124 .
Indermaur , David , and Mike Hough .
2002 .
Strategies for changing public attitudes to punishment .
In Changing Attitudes to Punishment : Public Opinion , Crime and Justice , eds .
Julian V. Roberts and Mike Hough .
Portland , OR : Willan .
Kautt , Paula , and Cassia Spohn .
2002 .
Cracking down on black drug of- fenders ?
Testing for interactions among offenders ’ race , drug type , and sentencing strategy in federal drug sentences .
Justice Quarterly 19:1–35 .
Keele , Luke J .
2007 .
Social capital and the dynamics of trust in government .
American Journal of Political Science 51:241–54 .
Kellstedt , Paul M. 2003 .
The Mass Media and the Dynamics of American Racial Attitudes .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 361 Klarner , Carl E. 2003 .
Measurement of partisan balance of state govern- ment .
State Politics & Policy Quarterly 3:309–19 .
Langworthy , Robert H. , and John T. Whitehead .
1986 .
Liberalism and fear as explanations of punitiveness .
Criminology 24:575–91 .
Loo , Dennis D. , and Ruth-Ellen M. Grimes .
2004 .
Polls , politics , and crime : The “ law and order ” issue of the 1960s .
Western Criminology Review 5:50–67 .
Mann , Coramae Richey .
1993 .
Unequal Justice : A Question of Color .
Bloomington : Indiana University Press .
Mauer , Marc .
2006 .
Race to Incarcerate .
New York : New Press .
Mayer , William G. 1993 .
The Changing American Mind .
Ann Arbor : Uni- versity of Michigan Press .
Messner , Steven F. , Eric P. Baumer , and Richard Rosenfeld .
2006 .
Distrust of government , the vigilante tradition , and support for capital punish- ment .
Law & Society Review 40:559–90 .
Neustadt , Richard E. 1990 .
Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents .
New York : Free Press .
Nicholson-Crotty , Sean , David A. M. Peterson , and Mark D. Ramirez .
2009 .
Dynamic representation ( s ) : Federal criminal justice policy and an alternative dimension of policy mood .
Political Behavior 31 : 629–55 .
Ogletree , Charles J .
2002 .
Black man ’ s burden : Race and the death penalty in America .
Oregon Law Review 81:15–38 .
Peffley , Mark , and Jon Hurwitz .
2007 .
Persuasion and resistance : Race and the death penalty in America .
American Journal of Political Science 51:996–1012 .
Petrocik , John R. 1996 .
Issue ownership in presidential elections , with a 1980 case study .
American Journal of Political Science 40:825–50 .
Piven , Frances F. 1985 .
Women and the state : Ideology , power , and the welfare state .
In Gender and the Life Course , ed .
Alice S. Rossi .
New York : Aldine .
Pratt , John .
2002 .
Punishment and Civilization : Penal Tolerance and Intol- erance in Modern Society .
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .
362 RAMIREZ Ramirez , Mark D. 2009 .
The dynamics of partisan conflict on congressional approval .
American Journal of Political Science 53:681–94 .
Rodriguez , Nancy , Hilary Smith , and Marjorie S. Zatz .
2009 .
Youth is en- meshed in a highly dysfunctional family system : Exploring the relation- ship among dysfunctional families , parental incarceration , and juvenile court decision making .
Criminology 47:177–208 .
Rose , Dina R. , and Todd R. Clear .
1998 .
Incarceration , social capital , and crime : Implications for social disorganization theory .
Criminology 36:441–80 .
Russell , Katheryn K. 1998 .
Color of Crime : Racial Hoaxes , White Fear , Black Protectionism , Police Harassment , and Other Macroaggressions .
New York : New York University Press .
Scheingold , Stuart A .
1984 .
The Politics of Law and Order : Street Crime and Public Policy .
New York : Longman .
Scheingold , Stuart A .
1998 .
Constructing the new political criminology : Power , authority , and the post-liberal state .
Law & Social Inquiry 23:857–96 .
Schneider , Anne Larason .
2006 .
Patterns of change in the use of imprison- ment in the American states : An integration of path dependence , punc- tuated equilibrium and policy design approaches .
Political Research Quarterly 59:457–60 .
Schuman , Howard , and Stanley Presser .
1981 .
Questions and Answers in At- titude Surveys : Experiments on Question Form , Wording , and Content .
New York : Academic Press .
Secret , Philip E. , and James B. Johnson .
1989 .
Racial differences in attitudes toward crime control .
Journal of Criminal Justice 17:361–75 .
Simon , Jonathan .
2007 .
Governing Through Crime .
New York : Oxford Uni- versity Press .
Simon , Jonathan , Ian Haney López , and Mary Louise Frampton .
2008 .
In- troduction .
In After the War on Crime : Race , Democracy , and a New Reconstruction , eds .
Mary Louise Frampton , Ian Haney López , and Jonathan Simon .
New York : New York University Press .
Skogan , Wesley G. 1995 .
Crime and racial fears of white Americans .
The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 539:59–71 .
PUNITIVE SENTIMENT 363 Soss , Joe , Laura Langbein , and Alan R. Metelko .
2003 .
Why do white Americans support the death penalty ?
Journal of Politics 65 : 397–421 .
Stabile , Carol .
2006 .
White Victims , Black Villains : Gender , Race , and Crime News in US Culture .
New York : Routledge .
Stalans , Loretta J .
2002 .
Measuring attitudes toward sentencing .
In Chang- ing Attitudes to Punishment : Public Opinion , Crime and Justice , eds .
Julian V. Roberts and Mike Hough .
Portland , OR : Willan .
Stimson , James A .
1999 .
Public Opinion in America : Moods , Cycles , and Swings , 2nd ed .
Boulder , CO : Westview Press .
Stinchcombe , Arthur , Rebecca Adams , Carol Heimer , Kim Lane , Tom Smith , and D. Garth Taylor .
1980 .
Crime and Punishment : Changing American Attitudes .
San Francisco , CA : Jossey-Bass .
Sutton , Adam .
1997 .
Crime prevention : The policy dilemmas—a personal account .
In Crime Prevention in Australia , eds .
Pat O ’ Malley and Adam Sutton .
Sydney , Australia : Federation Press .
Tonry , Michael H. 1995 .
Malign Neglect—Race , Crime and Punishment in America .
New York : Oxford University Press .
Tyler , Tom R. , and Robert J. Boeckmann .
1997 .
Three strikes and you are out , but why ?
The psychology of public support for punishing rule breakers .
Law & Society Review 31:237–65 .
Tyler , Tom R. , and Renee Weber .
1982 .
Support for the death penalty ; in- strumental response to crime , or symbolic attitude ?
Law & Society Re- view 17:21–46 .
Unnever , James D. , and Francis T. Cullen .
2005 .
Executing the innocent and support for capital punishment : Implications for public policy .
Criminology & Public Policy 4:3–38 .
Unnever , James D. , and Francis T. Cullen .
2010 .
The social sources of Americans ’ punitiveness : A test of three competing models .
Criminol- ogy 48:99–129 .
Walker , Samuel , Cassia Spohn , and Mirian DeLone .
1996 .
The Color of Justice .
New York : Wadsworth .
Warr , Mark .
1995 .
The polls—poll trends : Public opinion on crime and pun- ishment .
Public Opinion Quarterly 59:296–310 .
364 RAMIREZ Western , Bruce .
2006 .
Punishment and Inequality in America .
New York : Russell Sage Foundation .
Wilson , James Q .
1975 .
Thinking about Crime .
New York : Basic Books .
Zimring , Franklin E. 2003 .
The Contradictions of American Capital Punish- ment .
New York : Oxford University Press .
Zimring , Franklin E. , Gordon Hawkins , and Sam Kamin .
2001 .
Punishment and Democracy : Three Strikes and You ’ re Out in California .
New York : Oxford University Press .
Mark D. Ramirez is an assistant professor of political science in the School of Politics and Global Studies at Arizona State University .
He previously served as a fellow at the Center for Empirical Research in the Law at Washington University in Saint Louis , MO .
His current re- search focuses on the dynamics of public opinion , political psychology , and representation .
His recent research appears in the American Journal of Po- litical Science , Journal of Politics , Political Behavior , Political Psychology , and Public Opinion Quarterly .
SUPPORTING INFORMATION Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher ’ s web site : Appendix A .
Measuring Punitive Sentiment Appendix B .
Model Diagnostics Table B.1 .
Stationarity Tests
