Sullivan_WorldPolitics_2016_AQWj.pdf
ayamYrfc7x.lHrrSBSzBT7Vhbo5K-Sullivan_WorldPolitics_2016_AQWj.pdf.plain.html

Political RePRession and the destRuction of dissident oRganizations evidence from the archives of the guatemalan national Police By chRistoPheR M. sullivan* hoW does political repression affect overt , collective challenges to political authority , such as protests , acts of terror , or targeted attacks ?
understanding the effects of repression is crucial to establish- ing the underlying foundations of order and conflict .
When repression succeeds in limiting dissent , the government strengthens its monopoly over the use of force and impedes the development of future challenges .
When repression fails , it can lead to an escalation of challenger activity and the deterioration of order into civil war or revolution.1 But while decades of scholarship have been devoted to investigating the effects of repression , the literature has produced broadly inconclusive results.2 to reconcile these competing findings , a series of recent arguments propose a population-centric theory of conflict.3 from this perspective , challenges to the government depend upon the inflow of support from * this article benefited greatly from comments by Mark Beissinger , suparna chaudhry , christian davenport , stathis Kalyvas , Will Moore , amanda Murdie , allan stam , Kiyoteru tsusui , Michael Weintraub , elizabeth Wood , three anonymous reviewers , and the editors at World Politics .
i also thank alfredo garcia and Mario Muralles , who served as excellent research assistants .
the Kellogg institute for international studies , the national science foundation , the social science Research council , and Yale university ’ s Program on order , conflict , and violence provided support at various stages of this project .
1 Repression refers to “ coercive actions political authorities take to inhibit the will or capacity of people within their jurisdiction to influence political outcomes ” ( Ritter 2014 , 145 ) .
dissent refers to “ a sustained , organized .
.
.
effort making collective claims of target authorities ” ( tilly 2004 , 53 ) .
2 lichbach 1987 ; gupta , singh , and sprague 1993 ; gurr and Moore 1997 ; Moore 1998 ; daven- port , Johnston , and Mueller 2005 ; lyall 2006 ; lyall 2009 ; lyall 2010 ; cunningham and noakes 2008 ; lafree , dugan , and Korte 2009 ; Walsh and Piazza 2010 ; dugan and chenoweth 2012 ; daxecker and hess 2013 .
3 the term “ population-centric ” originated within policy debates surrounding counterinsurgency strategy , e.g. , Kilkullen 2009 ; Kilkullen 2010 .
World Politics 68 , no .
4 ( october 2016 ) , 645–76 copyright © 2016 trustees of Princeton university doi : 10.1017/s0043887116000125 ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. the effects of repression during the years 1975 to 1985 .
Results show that the effects of repression are more complex than previously imagined .
When repression targets the clandestine activities necessary to develop and sustain dissident organizations , such as holding meetings , training participants , and campaigning for funds , dissent declines significantly .
But when repression is directed at ongoing , overt , collective challenges , it motivates a backlash that escalates dissent .
Implications are drawn for how political order and conflict are understood and studied .
ABSTRACT How does repression influence overt , collective challenges directed against political authority ?
To date , answers to this question have been inconclusive .
This article argues that recent works inadequately address the topic because the focus has been on repression 's impact on local civilians , with less consideration of dissident organizations .
The author develops an organizational theory of challenger development and specifies predictions for how repression 's effects on dissent are contingent upon the types of organizational behaviors targeted for coercion .
The analysis employs original , microlevel data collected from previously confidential Guatemalan National Police records to assess 646 world politics 4 tarrow 1998 ; Beissinger 2002 ; Brocket 2005 .
5 Mason and Krane 1989 ; Kalyvas 2006 ; Kalyvas and Kocher 2007 ; Wood 2010 ; condra and sha- piro 2012 ; Kocher , Pepinski , and Kalyvas 2011 .
6 conrad and Ritter 2013 ; Young 2013 ; Ritter 2014 ; Ritter and conrad 2016 .
7 there is disagreement over the robustness of some of the population-centric results .
some re- search has found , for example , that indiscriminate repression is not always ineffective ( lyall 2009 ; zhukov 2015 ) and that popular grievances do not always translate into challenges ( aspinall 2007 ) .
8 in the absence of an organized alternative to the government , resistance can operate in the form of scattered attacks , such as foot-dragging , sabotage , and other “ weapons of the weak , ” but individuals are often unwilling or unable to speak collectively against the status quo .
gaventa 1982 ; scott 1985. local civilians .
consequently , repression ’ s effects are contingent upon the manner in which it affects the local population .
for example , several investigations within the protest-wave literature suggest that repression can generate opposing effects depending on the momentum of a move- ment ’ s popularity .
Where support for a movement is increasing , repres- sion may lead to an escalation of challenger activity , but where support is waning , repression may hasten its decline.4 another related theory contends that repression that indiscriminately targets the general pop- ulation can increase support for the movement and escalate conflict , whereas coercion that selectively targets only movement participants and their backers effectively deters support and leads to de-escalation.5 in addition , pioneering research aims to endogenize the repression- dissent relationship and to predict conflict outcomes as a function of the government ’ s popular support and the leader ’ s perceived security in office.6 Where repression negatively impacts popular support , it can decrease the leader ’ s time horizon and lead to rapid escalations in politi- cal conflict .
Yet the puzzle of the conflict-repression nexus persists at least in part because of important limitations associated with population- centric modeling.7 for example , while the above arguments improve our understanding of how repression affects popular sentiment , each theory relies on the often implicit assumption that functional challenger or- ganizations exist to translate sentiment into action .
But spontaneous cooperation is extraordinarily difficult during routine politics , and can be nearly impossible during times of heavy repression .
8 consequently , i argue that what matters most for understanding repression ’ s effects is not the amount of antigovernment sentiment , but its degree of orga- nization .
Without functional challenger organizations , backlash of any kind becomes extraordinarily unlikely as the movement can not provide selective incentives or channel retaliation .
correspondingly , even se- lectively targeted repression and/or repression directed at the height of a movement ’ s popularity can have multidirectional effects on future challenges depending on how it influences the capacity and strategy of ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 647 9 Weinstein 2007 ; staniland 2012 ; staniland 2014 ; lewis 2012 ; shapiro and siegel 2012 ; shapiro 2013 ; Parkinson 2013 .
10 carmack 1992 ; stoll 1993 ; schirmer 1998 ; archdiocese of guatemala 1999 ; Ball , Kobrak , and spirer 1999 ; Manz 2004 ; Brocket 2005 ; garrard-Burnett 2011. challenger organizations .
in addition , renewed focus on the organiza- tion of dissent can help to specify the sequence of strategic interactions that leads from successful preemptive repression and contained dissent to escalations in the use of force by both sides .
Building on a burgeoning body of research that examines the or- ganizational underpinnings of rebellion,9 this article proposes an or- ganizational-targeting model to explain the impact of repression on dissent .
the argument identifies distinct processes in the organization of dissent and asserts that repression of organizations , not merely in- dividuals , limits backlash .
governments are able to suppress dissent when they direct repression at the generally clandestine mobilization activities necessary to inspire and sustain dissident organizations , such as holding meetings , training participants , and campaigning for funds .
When government forces target these forms of mobilization behav- ior , coercion undermines the capacity of the organization to coordinate collective action and incentivize participation , and thereby diminishes subsequent challenges .
alternatively , when repression is directed at overt , collective challenges , such as when police respond to an ongoing demonstration , attack , or riot , it leaves challenger organizations intact to publicize abuse and to deliver the selective incentives necessary to promote further challenges .
i test these arguments using original data collected from an archive of previously confidential documents produced by the guatemalan national Police between 1975 and 1985. over this period , the gov- ernment of guatemala employed a wide variety of repressive tactics , ranging from political arrests to targeted assassinations , against a broad set of challengers and would-be challengers that included unions , peas- ant cooperatives , land-rights groups , catholic activists , students , urban revolutionaries , and Marxist insurgents.10 guatemala ’ s history of ap- palling violence makes the country a relatively fruitful setting in which to test the expectations of the argument .
Because of the wide variation in repression and dissent that occurred , studying the guatemalan case can provide lessons for an encompassing variety of states , ranging from those engaged in low-level abuses to those committing more egregious human rights violations .
a within-country analysis holds important structural constraints constant while observing subnational variation in both the independent and dependent variables .
the precise nature of ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 648 world politics the data identifies the targets of each repressive action , where and when the repression occurred , and the type of activity it targeted ( that is , mo- bilization activities or overt , collective challenges ) .
statistical analyses reveal that repression directed at mobilization activities strongly cor- relates with decreased challenges against the government .
Repression directed at overt , collective challenges correlates with significantly in- creased dissent .
in addition to providing new insight into the puzzle of repression and dissent , the results from this organizational model reveal a number of important selection mechanisms operating within the broader study of order and conflict .
When governments disrupt the mobilization pro- cess , the targets ’ capacity to express political ideas can be systematically censored from the public sphere .
alternatively , when dissidents outpace the government and mobilize surreptitiously , they are able to recruit and inspire participation in political challenges even as governments attempt to repress those activities .
consequently , the success or failure of mobilizers ’ efforts to evade repression shapes the types of movements that emerge to challenge governments , as well as the issues over which conflicts occur .
the article proceeds as follows : first , i discuss case material from guatemala illustrating how the repression of mobilization activities differs in practice from repression targeting overt , collective challenges .
i then develop a model of dissident organization specifying how repres- sion affects distinct organizational behaviors .
subsequently , i provide historical context detailing patterns of repression and dissent in gua- temala from 1975 to 1985. i next present and then analyze the data .
in the penultimate section , i discuss the results and consider substantive effects , comparisons to population-centric models , endogeneity , and generalizabil- ity .
in the conclusion , i discuss implications for future research .
Mobilization , repression , and overt , collective challenges on the morning of January 31 , 1980 , a group of armed indigenous peasants and student activists occupied the spanish embassy in gua- temala city to protest human rights violations taking place in northern guatemala .
Police forces surrounded the building and fired phospho- rous gas into the embassy to disperse the protesters .
the gas ignited and the resulting fire killed thirty-six people.11 on that same day in the municipality of chimaltenago , another unit 11 ahpn 2010a .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 649 of the guatemalan police conducted surveillance on a group of orga- nizers and community leaders whom police suspected of publishing pamphlets to incite the local population.12 over the next two months , the organizers in chimaltenango were steadily kidnapped or were dis- appeared by agents of the guatemalan government.13 these two repressive events epitomize two distinct methods of gov- ernment coercion .
in the first , state agents respond to an overt , col- lective challenge , attempting to impose costs on challengers .
in the second , repression is directed at organizers in an effort to limit their capacity for coordinating collective action .
the effects of these events were also broadly divergent .
in the months following the embassy fire , guatemala city witnessed an increase in insurgent bombings and at- tacks on the police.14 in chimaltenango , overt , collective challenges did not recur until nearly a year later.15 historically , when looking at the repression of dissent , scholars have been principally concerned with events such as those at the spanish embassy , in which state forces respond to ongoing challenges .
in one of the literature ’ s most robust findings , states are shown recurrently to increase their use of repression in response to observed increases in overt challenges.16 in addition , subspecializations of literature address repressive responses to specific kinds of challenges , including studies on protest policing , counterterrorism , and counterinsurgency .
Yet although governments often argue that the use of coercion is a measured response to “ civil unrest , ” prior work demonstrates that gov- ernment forces also attempt to anticipate and suppress the emergence of overt , collective challenges.17 sophisticated surveillance apparatuses are established to monitor social behavior , while armed security forces are trained to direct coercion at developing threats.18 efforts to form or maintain challenger organizations provide govern- ments with an indicator of threat development .
although mass partici- pation in the end stages of a revolution can appear spontaneous , such collective action is reliant on a small group of organizers who sustain the movement during times of quiescence and support participation once a protest wave has begun.19 consistent with this contention , past 12 ahpn 2010b .
13 ahpn 2010c .
14 ahpn 2010d ; ahpn 2010e ; ahpn 2010f .
15 ahpn 2010g .
16 davenport 2007a ; hill and Jones 2014 ; see also Ritter and conrad 2016 .
17 Walter 2006 ; herreros and criado 2009 ; nordas and davenport 2013 ; danneman and Ritter 2014 ; Ritter and conrad 2016 .
18 lewis 2012 ; sullivan 2015 .
19 oliver 1984 ; taylor 1989 ; chong 1991. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 650 world politics research on resource mobilization suggests that overt , collective chal- lenges , such as protests , strikes , acts of terror , or insurgent attacks , can only emerge from a preexisting organizational platform that serves to coordinate participants , to direct strategy , and to deliver selective incen- tives.20 organizational formation , development , and maintenance occur through a series of behaviors that can be referred to collectively as mo- bilization activities .
Mobilization activities , which include actions such as holding meetings , creating new institutions and roles , campaigning for funds or equipment , generating shared symbols and identities , dis- seminating information , recruiting new members , and training partici- pants , are generally clandestine , collective behaviors necessary to form an organized alternative to the regime .
Mobilization activities are difficult to undertake and require exten- sive contributions from a relatively small set of individuals.21 Yet they fulfill a number of functions necessary for supporting and sustaining participation in overt , collective challenges .
three functions are partic- ularly significant .
first , mobilization activities help to restructure social affiliations.22 By shaping social ties , influencing communication , and formulating collective values , such as common symbols , focal points , and identities , these activities transition the alignment of preexisting social networks away from the state and toward the opposition.23 the effect increases shared expectations for participation in overt , collec- tive challenges .
second , mobilization activities generate resources that can be redistributed as selective incentives.24 they establish supply net- works to funnel resources , such as food , funding , or weapons , into an organizational infrastructure that can reallocate the resource flows to individuals on the periphery of the movement.25 the effect provides the structural foundation for growth by increasing individual incentives for participation .
third , mobilization activities help to institutionalize tit- for-tat reciprocity.26 they form an organizational base that supports the sustained interactions required for the evolution of collective monitor- 20 Mccarthy and zald 1977 ; tilly 1978 ; Morris 1984 ; oliver 1984 ; Mcadam 1982 ; Marwell and oliver 1993 ; tarrow 1998 ; staniland 2012 ; Parkinson 2013 .
21 oliver 1984 .
22 lichbach 1995 , 149–56 .
23 Morris 1984 , chap .
3 ; chong 1991 , chap .
6 ; gould 1995 ; Wood 2003 , chap .
3–4 ; Parkinson 2013 ; staniland 2014 .
24 lichbach , 1995 , 36–38 .
25 Mccarthy and zald 1977 ; Mcadam 1982 ; Morris 1984 , chap .
8 ; oliver 1984 ; chong 1991 , 126–41 ; staniland 2012 ; Parkinson 2013 .
26 lichbach 1995 , 129–46 .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 651 ing and enforcement.27 the effect facilitates the long-term trust neces- sary to produce cooperation even when any one individual ’ s participa- tion is contingent on the participation of others .
in the presence of sustained mobilization , the possibilities for mass participation shift dramatically .
individuals who had previously acqui- esced to political authority find themselves forced to choose between the demands of the existing government and an organized challenger promising a variety of selective and collective goods in exchange for in- dividual participation.28 in this way , mobilization activities must begin before overt , collective challenges can take place , but also must persist to sustain challenges over time .
the Multidirectional iMpacts of political repression for governments seeking to maximize the security of their office , em- ploying repression against mobilization activities , even when dissidents are not actively challenging the government , can prevent the occurrence of overt , collective challenges by depleting the organizational resources necessary to inspire and sustain such activities.29 When governments are able to identify mobilization activities and direct repression at those efforts , they aim to repress the behind-the-scenes individuals at the core of challenger organizations .
these organizers are responsible for invest- ing disproportionately in developing behavioral challenges .
Without confronting the rank and file , security forces can focus coercion on re- moving these individuals or on disrupting their behavior .
Because mobilization activities typically take place clandestinely , repressing them can be difficult .
challenger organizations attempt to shield their behavior from the government , for example , by developing underground safe houses and supply networks .
the obstacles associ- ated with identifying mobilization activities and directing repression at such behavior mean that even while governments may prefer to re- press mobilization prior to the onset of overt , collective challenges , they often have trouble identifying the initial instances of mobilization.30 But as governments begin to suspect increased mobilization activity , 27 hardin 1982 , 165–87 ; axelrod 1984 , 124–42 ; ostrom 1990 , 94–100 ; chong 1991 , chap .
3 .
28 tilly 1978 , 192 .
29 these predicted effects are expected to hold on average , ceteris paribus .
Below , the study ad- dresses some structural factors that might mediate the relationship between repression , mobilizing activities , and overt , collective challenges .
30 it suffices to say that there is a minimum amount of state capacity necessary to identify and re- press mobilization activities .
state capacity is addressed in greater detail below and in the supplemen- tary material .
sullivan 2016. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 652 world politics for example , when movements reveal their capacity for overt , collective challenges or when government surveillance yields actionable intelli- gence , forces are redistributed to direct surveillance and repression to suspected mobilization sites .
targeting mobilization with repression has important implications for the production of overt , collective challenges .
first , it can lead group members to reevaluate decisions to align themselves in opposition to the state .
such repression affects the core organizations responsible for sustaining common expectations for cooperative behavior , and can dis- rupt delicate assurances for cooperation .
second , repressing mobiliza- tion activities depletes the resources available for organizations to fund their activities and incentivize participation .
third , it can destabilize long-term trust between individuals .
Repressing mobilization activities limits the capacity for challenger organizations to fulfill their commit- ments to members , which can push tit-for-tat strategies away from an all-cooperate equilibrium to an all-defect equilibrium .
these observa- tions lead to the study ’ s first hypothesis : —h1 .
When mobilization activities are repressed , overt , collective chal- lenges will decrease .
Within this consideration , the persistence of challengers depends on the strategic interaction of government forces and dissident orga- nizations.31 dissidents enter into challenges expecting repression but possess imperfect information about precisely how the state will deploy coercion .
similarly , governments repress in anticipation of a challenger response while trying to outwit or overwhelm their adversaries.32 as noted above , there is strong evidence that increases in overt , col- lective challenges correlate with increased repression.33 governments repress overt , collective challenges for several reasons .
Most notably , overt , collective challenges threaten government control over public policy and public space.34 When governments repress ongoing chal- lenges , such as when coercion is deployed against a demonstration or to push back an advancing armed group , their strategy is designed to reestablish control , remove challengers , and present the appearance of a stable political order .
When governments choose to ignore overt , col- lective challenges , it signals that they are unable or unwilling to control the population and may not deliver on their policy proposals .
Percep- 31 francisco 1995 ; Moore 1995 ; Pierskalla 2010 ; Young 2013 ; Ritter 2014 ; Ritter and conrad 2016 .
32 davenport 2014 .
33 davenport 2007a ; carey 2010. see also Ritter and conrad 2016 .
34 davenport 1995 ; davenport , soule , and armstrong 2011. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 653 tions of instability could motivate a government ’ s coalition to consider defecting to challenger organizations or to other rival elite factions.35 the implication is that overt , collective challenges will motivate in- creased repression as the regime seeks to reestablish order , impose costs on challengers , and demonstrate resolve .
But when governments target overt , collective challenges with re- pression , such action does little to diminish organizational capacities for challenging the state .
although governments commonly employ repression against ongoing challenges in an attempt to stabilize political control , repression of this type of behavior is not typically directed to- ward limiting the organizational leadership , resource stocks , or symbol- ic values crucial to formulating a coherent retaliation.36 When govern- ments direct repression at individuals committing attacks or protests , coercion is selectively aimed at dissidents and their backers .
however , this form of repression effectively targets individuals on the front lines and not the activists and leaders at the core of the movement behind the scenes.37 even where the government may wish to attack the organizational leadership , the movement ’ s existing infrastructure can effectively shield organizers and their resource endowments from the most severe costs of repression .
the movement ’ s ability to wage overt , collective challenges demonstrates a sophisticated level of organizational development .
an- ticipating repression allows organizations to take proactive steps , such as shielding them behind the scenes , having lower-level activists direct violent challenges , and devising escape plans to transport leaders away , to protect mobilizers from coercion .
to the extent that organizational leaders remain active and retain ac- cess to mobilized resources , they retain the capability to encourage par- ticipation and direct challenges .
in response to the repression of overt , collective challenges , the movement ’ s organizational base can facilitate a number of related counterstrategies that contribute to the growth of backlash challenges.38 two are particularly noteworthy .
first , in the 35 Ritter 2014 .
36 expectations of backlash mobilization are consistent with research examining repression and dissent as mutually determined outcomes , e.g. , Pierskalla 2010 ; Young 2013 ; Ritter 2014. for instance , Young 2013 , 519 , argues that when the government believes that survival is at stake , leaders “ pursue strategies that maintain the leader ’ s present position , but are potentially more costly for the leader in the future. ” in some cases , leaders may even wish to instigate conflict as a means of demonstrating their resolve and capabilities for repression .
37 in many cases , the government does not know the identities or appearance of the organizational leadership .
38 in addition to increasing the number of challenges , repression targeting overt , collective chal- lenges may influence the form such challenges take ( for example , by pushing movements underground and away from mass politics ) .
future work will be necessary to investigate the relationship between ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 654 world politics aftermath of repression targeting overt , collective challenges , movement organizations are able to vouch for existing assurances of cooperation by doling out the requisite selective incentives necessary to balance out some of the costs of repression imposed upon frontline members .
in many cases , this may take the form of protection from ensuing targeting by the state , for example , through the identification of safe houses and other forms of shelter.39 in other cases , it can mean direct payments , such as salaries , legal fees , or martyrs ’ tributes to the families of abused individuals.40 second , in the aftermath of repression , the organizations can publicize abuses committed by government forces and use them as a focal point or rallying cry to direct new collective action .
By framing repression in terms of attacks on shared values and symbols , mobilizers can expose the abuses committed and identify state coercion as a threat to collective interests.41 the effect further demarcates social boundaries and politicizes social identification , increasing collective expectations for participation and drawing new members into the movement.42 as a result , in the wake of repression targeting overt , challenges , backlash waves can emerge that increase such challenges .
this discus- sion yields the second testable hypothesis : —h2 .
When overt , collective challenges are repressed , overt , collective challenges will increase .
When considering the evolution of these expectations , the sequence of government-dissident interactions is important .
Where govern- ments accumulate sufficient information on organizers to repeatedly repress mobilization , it can destroy challenger organizations .
Because both mobilization and the repression of mobilization typically take place underground , the implication is that where governments can re- peatedly surveil and repress mobilization , there exists a set of potential claims-making efforts that never make it to the public sphere .
in this case , the repression of mobilization prevents the emergence of overt , collective challenges that are , as a result , censored from public politics .
alternatively , when mobilizers are able to outpace government repres- sion and bring their demands to the public , such action can lead to con- flict spirals .
in this case , initial outbursts of overt , collective challenges motivate repression , which motivates more conflict .
tactical selection and the number of challenges directed at the government in the wake of political repression .
39 Kalyvas and Kocher 2007 .
40 Parkinson 2013 .
41 goldstone and tilly 2001 .
42 Wood 2003 ; francisco 2004. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 655 governments attuned to these dynamics may attempt to extract in- formation from the repression of overt , collective challenges—informa- tion that would assist in the repression of subsequent mobilization and thus deescalate the conflict spiral.43 arrests made during the repres- sion of overt , collective challenges potentially result in interrogation , torture , and attempts to coerce captured dissidents into defecting.44 in this manner , defeating dissidents requires positive feedback between government efforts to collect intelligence on dissident mobilization and targeted coercive action taken to contain or eliminate these organiza- tional activities .
crucially , repression also reveals information to organizers about how much the government knows about their ( potential ) activities .
and dissidents are often adaptive to these dynamics .
in response to re- pression directed against overt , collective challenges , movements can be expected to change their organizational structure and shift their tactical repertoire to prevent or counteract government information accumula- tion .
among other strategies , they may change the location of their meetings , alter their leadership , restructure organizational networks , or engage in acts of dissent that are less easily monitored by the state.45 over time , dissidents attuned to these dynamics may develop mobi- lization plans that emulate the strategies of successful groups , and wise governments will emulate successful tactics for repressing mobilization .
this evolution should motivate dissidents to develop tactics that make mobilization less observable , and push governments to develop new technologies for surveillance.46 these ideas extend the arguments discussed above and consider re- pression and dissent as part of larger patterns of closely related phenom- 43 Because mobilization and overt , collective challenges are conceptually distinct ideal types , within this simplified theoretical argument they are considered to exist in distinct points in space and time .
as a result , repression targeting mobilization and repression targeting overt , collective challenges also ex- ist theoretically as distinct events in different locations and times ( even if the events are closely related temporally or spatially ) .
in this manner , it makes more sense to think of a sequence of related actions , rather than both types of repression occurring simultaneously .
44 Whether the repression of overt , collective challenges increases or decreases future repression di- rected against mobilization depends upon the balance between ( a ) how much information is delivered to governments about anticipated dissident mobilization and ( b ) how much information is delivered to dissidents about anticipated government repression .
45 it is possible that such adaptation draws resources from the organization and slows the capacity of the challengers to organize attacks ( Wood 2007 ) .
empirically , as identified in the analysis below , repression of overt , collective challenges produced a short-term increase in challenger actions .
But i leave future work to identify how the transition toward clandestine organizational forms and tactics shapes the form or content of subsequent challenges .
see also davenport 2014 .
46 Movements may also learn to mobilize around issues the government chose not to repress , lead- ing to moderation ; governments may likewise develop tactics for co-opting or managing the demands of successful movements .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 656 world politics ena rather than as isolated events.47 this logic generates predictions for where and when we should observe both escalatory and de-escalatory cycles of conflict .
the emergence of overt , collective challenges suggests either that the government was unconcerned with the demands of the dissidents or that it was unable to suppress the movement at the mobi- lization stage.48 successful repression will be observed where organizers hold some initial possibility for coordinating overt , collective challenges but the government is able to accumulate coercive capacity and impose increasingly severe costs on those organizers.49 escalation of conflict behavior will occur when the initial costs of organizing dissent are low and the punishment associated with repression remains restricted to individuals unaffiliated with the movement ’ s organizational base .
studying repression and dissent in guateMala the arguments above are evaluated using data on government and dis- sident behavior that occurred in guatemala between 1975 and 1985. the form and severity of contentious politics varied widely across both time and space during this period .
early on , the conflict was largely iso- lated to more urban municipalities , such as guatemala city or escuint- la .
But as repression escalated , conflict spread to the rural highlands and to smaller municipalities such as solola and zacapa .
By all accounts , the country was in the throes of civil war from , at minimum , 1977 to 1983.50 Repression hit its peak between 1981 and 1983. human rights organizations identify the rampant abuse that occurred during this pe- riod ; tens of thousands were killed and many more displaced from their homes.51 Political conflict continued to wax and wane in both territo- rial scope and intensity during the period in review .
eventually , conflict between the state and the organized opposition settled into a low-level stalemate that persisted for more than a decade before the 1996 peace negotiations .
While many observers see the government ’ s pacification of the coun- 47 francisco 1995 ; Beissinger 2007 ; Wood 2007 ; della Porta and tarrow 2012 .
48 consistent with work examining the endogeniety of repression and dissent , it is assumed that governments with the greatest capacity for repressing challengers will also be those most likely to deter dissidents or to contain dissent at the mobilization stage ( Pierskalla 2010 ; conrad and Ritter 2013 ; Ritter 2014 ; Ritter and conrad 2016 ) .
49 Ritter 2014 , 119–27 .
50 Many historians date the civil war as persisting from an earlier conflict beginning in 1960 ( garrard- Burnett 2011 ) .
others see the conflicts as distinct and date the civil war onset in 1977 ( Brocket 2005 ) .
51 commission for historical clarification 1999 ; Ball , Kobrak , and sprier 1999 ; archdiocese of guatemala 1999 ; sanford 2004. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 657 try as a victory of indiscriminate violence , particularly the massacres committed by elite units of the military,52 it is important to note that while massacres are perhaps the most appalling form of government violence , repression in guatemala encompassed an extremely broad va- riety of tactics deployed by several different units within the security apparatus .
in the highlands , massacres by the military were commonly combined with two efforts to eradicate the base from which rural in- surgents were mobilizing—forced displacement of indigenous peasants into “ model villages ” and the organization of remaining communities into paramilitary units directly overseen by the government .
alongside this military effort , the national Police engaged in a broad , repressive campaign designed to root out individuals believed to be “ subversives. ” although the application of repression by the national Police has re- ceived less attention , they were ferocious in their efforts to counter what the government perceived to be a growing communist threat perpe- trated by a unified front of unions , students , indigenous activists , and insurgents.53 to track the activities of these groups and target coercive behavior , the state developed a sophisticated system of surveillance , double agents , and civilian informants , in which the national Police played a large role.54 guatemala received aid and training in intelligence collection from the cia and the us army , as well as argentine , chil- ean , colombian , israeli , and taiwanese intelligence forces.55 Money and attention were devoted to developing a police force with national jurisdiction that was highly skilled at investigation , intimidation , and abuse.56 the national Police were responsible for arresting , torturing , and killing individuals identified as threats to the state.57 they also car- ried out more typical police operations , such as clearing streets , corral- ling demonstrations , and monitoring highway traffic .
throughout the period , the police and the military remained in close collaboration ; this coordination is captured in the police files discussed in detail below .
the guatemalan civil war was one of the deadliest conflicts to occur in the americas .
in this way , guatemala functions as a unique labora- tory for examining repressive action .
it is certainly an outlier in terms 52 stoll 1993 ; commission for historical clarification 1999 .
53 in actuality , these groups were fractured and pursued what were often mutually exclusive goals .
in future analyses , it will be important to disaggregate interactions between government forces and specific social movements .
54 archdiocese of guatemala 1999 ; commission for historical clarification 1999 ; guberek 2012 ; Weld 2014 ; schirmer 1998 .
55 Mcclintock 1985 ; Jonas 1996 ; schirmer 1998 .
56 commission for historical clarification 1999 ; archdiocese of guatemala 1999 .
57 guberek 2012 ; ahpn 2011. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 658 world politics of the amount of repression employed , which to some may indicate that the case can only be generalized to other civil war settings .
But that sidesteps the question of how civil wars emerge , and effectively ignores the fact that civil war is the result of strategic decisions made by gov- ernments and challengers .
Periods of heightened violence ebbed and flowed over different areas of guatemala during the decade in review .
in discussing the case and considering its generalizability , it is impor- tant to be explicit about the scope conditions of my argument .
as the theoretical dynamics consider interactions between a government and a challenger , a primary concern must be that the government is facing some ( minimally ) organized opposition.58 this excludes situations in which the government does not need to repress because coercion oper- ates effectively as a deterrent , as in some highly authoritarian settings in which would-be dissidents do not consider organizing to challenge the regime out of fear .
it also excludes situations where the government re- frains from engaging in repression due to constraints placed upon it by domestic institutions or by its underlying capacity for coercion.59 there must exist some minimum amount of surveillance capacity to identify at least some acts of mobilization .
territorially divided sovereignty is not necessary.60 But the government must be deploying repression to enforce compliance with its authority , rather than removing or destroy- ing the local population.61 concerning the form and severity of repres- sion , coercion must clearly surpass some threshold to affect challengers , but my research does not attempt to identify where that threshold is or how variation across repressive intensity affects dissent .
instead , the focus here is on organizational targeting .
another important distinc- tion is this study ’ s concern with de facto rather than de jure forms of re- pression .
While legalized restrictions , such as general curfews and pro- hibitions on assembly , are designed to influence challenger formation and strategy , this work is interested exclusively in discreet , observable acts of repression , which may or may not be legally sanctioned.62 Within these constraints , the expectations of the argument are pre- dicted to hold in situations outside guatemala .
however , as the external 58 these dissidents must have some disagreement with the government that leads them to seek redress outside the institutional channels of the regime .
59 concerns over constraints may be less important in the presence of dissent , as challenges to the state have been shown to mitigate institutional constraints on repression .
davenport 2007b ; conrad and Moore 2010 .
60 territorially divided sovereignty can be defined as situations in which dissidents have demarcated territory within which they attempt to monopolize legitimate means of coercion ( Kalyvas 2006 , 22– 23 ) .
While the expectations of the argument are thought to apply both in situations where sovereignty is territorially divided as well as where it is not , targeting mobilization may be made more difficult in settings where dissidents can control territory and restrict flows of information to the state .
61 Walter 1969 ; sullivan 2012 .
62 cf .
Koopmans 1997. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 659 validity of any single country study can not be easily generalized , it will be important for future work to examine the operation of this study ’ s findings within other cases .
in particular , there is a need to replicate the analyses in cases where there was less violence and more democracy , or different levels of state capacity .
i return to issues of replication and generalizability in the discussion section below .
But it is crucial to note that this case allows examination of variation across the full spectrum of repressive practices while holding relevant external factors constant .
examining variation within this single country can also address the microdynamics of challenger organization and government targeting that can not be identified using broad cross-national data sets .
data data for this study are taken from the guatemalan national Police historical archive ( ahpn ) , a collection of previously confidential police records found in guatemala city .
the ahpn data track the diverse pub- lic and private behaviors of social movements , specify the organizational behaviors targeted by the government , and enable the identification of repression ’ s effects on subsequent overt , collective challenges .
for nearly a hundred years , the guatemalan national Police stored their records in a large warehouse located within a police compound on the outskirts of the capital .
in 1996 , the national Police were disbanded and reformed into the new national civilian Police , which included members of the demobilized insurgent organizations .
documents lingered in the ware- house for nearly ten years until they were discovered by the country ’ s human Rights ombudsman ’ s office in 2006 .
What the ombudsman uncovered was a trove of more than eighty million records containing information produced during the routine bureaucratic processes that accompanied police surveillance , arrests , torture , and other repressive acts , including memos passed up and down the chain of command , arrest records , log files summarizing daily ac- tivity , and investigative reports produced by local divisions , the central command , or other specialized units .
With aid from several european governments , the ahpn indexed , digitized , and archived its collection of approximately ten million documents dating from 1975–85.63 those documents were released to the public in early 2009 ; my project is one of the first to access the full digital collection.64 to create an events database of political activity from the ahpn ’ s 63 Weld 2014 .
64 the ahpn is available online at https : //ahpn.lib.utexas.edu .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 660 world politics 1975–85 digital collection , i used a multistage sampling procedure.65 in total , more than 300,000 files were read , including every file sent to the director general ’ s office and the office for coordinating Mili- tary and Police activity .
coders read each file and coded all politically relevant events into the database using a coding rubric that included nearly one hundred event types.66 Records from the ahpn contain infor- mation on more than 3,400 events in which members of civil society or social movements participated , including more than 1,500 mobilization activities .
a comparable sample collected from the major international and domestic press identifies less than half of those events and fewer than two hundred mobilization activities.67 it is important to be aware of the potential biases in all data sources .
for example , with reference to the reporting of repression in this period , given the Jimmy carter administration ’ s emphasis on human rights , it is clear that the regime was consciously trying to improve its international human rights reputation by concealing evidence of massacres.68 the sup- plemental material to this article contains a discussion that details case- specific information on underreporting as it pertains to the ahpn data.69 What makes the ahpn data unique is that they were produced by a bu- reaucracy that believed its records would never be made public , and they were released without the oversight of the regime responsible for the repression.70 as a consequence of the relatively open access to the docu- ments , the collection represents one of the most transparent sources of data on repressive behavior identified to date.71 Most important , the ahpn data allow for direct observation of the targets of political repression .
Whereas other data sets have been forced to draw inferences about targeting based on the form of repression ap- plied , the weapon utilized , or scope of victimization , the ahpn files identify both the types of activity engaged in by state forces and the targets that each activity was directed against .
65 the files were read by me and two other coders , and i adjudicated any coding disputes .
inter- coder reliability checks consistently demonstrated reliability rates well above 85 percent .
the coding rubric , along with additional details on the sampling procedure and data collection process , can be found in the supplemental material .
sullivan 2016 .
66 the database thus captures all political activity identified by the national Police and the Military coordination office .
this corpus can be used as a proxy for the set of political activity the government was aware of , but should not be thought of as a complete universe of political actions .
67 sullivan 2015 .
68 doyle 1999 ; guberek 2012 .
69 sullivan 2016 .
70 doyle 2007 ; Weld 2014 ; sullivan 2015 .
71 us readers might want to imagine a successful freedom of information act request for which the fbi was required to turn over all its documents , unredacted , for a ten-year period .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 661 analysis this analysis investigates how repression that targets overt , collective challenges or mobilization affects subsequent patterns of dissent .
i be- gin by employing the most common methodology for estimating re- pression ’ s effects and use a cross-sectional time-series design to identify correlations between lagged values of repression ( measured at time t-1 ) and overt , collective challenges occurring during the subsequent time period ( time t ) .
the units of analysis are monthly measures for repres- sion and dissent in each of guatemala ’ s 326 municipalities.72 Overt , collective challenges are operationalized as public efforts by organized challengers to press claims against political authority .
ex- amples include strikes , demonstrations , marches , roadblocks , targeted killings , arson , kidnapping , and the taking of hostages.73 Mobilization activities are operationalized as dissident behavior designed to increase the level of formal organization of a dissident group or to raise the resource endowment of existing challenger organizations .
examples of mobilization activities include the distribution of information , orga- nizational meetings , training sessions , and recruitment efforts .
Overt , collective challenges and mobilization activities are each measured as a count of the number of events in each category occurring inside a municipality-month .
Political repression is operationalized as politically motivated violence committed by representatives of the state against individuals under their political jurisdiction .
examples of repression captured in the data include death threats , torture , disappearances , shootings , raids , protest policing , and politically motivated arrests .
Police forces were exclusively responsible for 52 percent of the repressive activity identified in the sample , while the remaining repression was either exclusively carried out by the military or involved coordinated military-police operations .
each instance of political repression is further coded as to the type of dissident action it targeted .
this process makes it possible to identify for each repressive act whether coercion was directed at mobilization activities ; overt , collective challenges ; or no apparent act of dissident behavior.74 Repression of mobilization and repression of overt , collective 72 Municipalities are the second smallest administrative unit in guatemala .
in 1973 , the least pop- ulous was san Jose chacaya , with 567 inhabitants , and the largest was guatemala city , with 700,460 inhabitants .
73 this is admittedly a broad categorization .
future analyses might further divide overt , collective challenges based on the various tactics employed by challengers .
74 there were very few incidents of repression ( fewer than fifty ) for which there were no connected or related acts of non-state behavior .
this fact provides some interesting insight into when , how , and ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 662 world politics challenges are similarly measured as counts of events ( for each type of targeted repression ) in each municipality-month .
to account for unobserved confounders influencing repression and challenger behavior , all statistical models control for lagged trends in the dependent variable ( overt , collective challenges ) and incorporate municipal-level random effects.75 all models also control for a lag of mobilization activities to account for the study ’ s theoretical concern with the connection between mobilization and overt , collective challenges .
additional controls are included as robustness checks within several model specifications .
for example , the country ’ s annual democracy score ( measured using the Michael coppedge , angel alvarez , and claudia Maldonado standardized inclusion metric ) is included because prior work demonstrates that national democratic institutions robustly affect both repression and dissent.76 it is also possible that conflict behavior is being driven by structural conditions operating at the local level .
three time-invariant measures are included to identify the strategic context of each municipality : logged municipal population , percentage of the mu- nicipality that was indigenous , and percentage of the municipality that was literate .
these values are taken from a census conducted in 1973 .
Population is included to account for the impact this variable has on the scale of dissident and government activities.77 indigenous population rates are included because previous research draws strong connections between guatemala ’ s ethnic divisions and the dynamics of the con- flict.78 literacy rates are include as an indicator of local state capacity , which can affect decisions to organize against the government and the government ’ s capacity for monitoring such behavior.79 alongside the structural variables , two measures of challenger behavior in neighboring territories are included as controls—a spatial-temporal lag of mobiliza- tion activities and a spatial-temporal lag of overt , collective challenges .
the spatial-temporal lags measure counts of different forms of challenger behavior inversely weighted by how far from a given municipality they occurred.80 the lags are included to account for the influence of why repression is applied .
on the other side , there were a large number ( more than 800 ) of mobili- zation activities and overt , collective challenges for which the state ’ s only identifiable action was the filing of a report .
75 angrist and Pischke 2009 , 245–46 .
76 When compared to many alternative democracy metrics , the coppedge , alvarez , and Maldo- nado 2008 inclusion measure is both ( 1 ) less likely to capture civil liberties restrictions and ( 2 ) less sensitive to biases resulting from conflict and missing data .
77 Raleigh and hegre 2009 .
78 Ball , Kobrak , and spirer 1999 ; commission for historical clarification 1999 .
79 fearon and laitin 2003 .
80 Ward and gleditsch 2008. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 663 regional patterns of dissent and repression on local conflict dynamics.81 subsequent tests incorporate annual and department-level fixed effects to guard against potential confounding factors occurring at more ag- gregate temporal or geographic units.82 Results are presented in table 1 .
Models 1–3 estimate the effects of repression on overt , collective challenges occurring the following month , and models 4–6 estimate these same relationships while differ- encing the time-variant independent and dependent variables ( for ex- ample , DXi , t = Xi , t – Xi , t–1 ) .
thus instead of estimating how many overt , collective challenges occurred in a municipality-month as a function of how many repressive events occurred during the previous month , they estimate how changes in rates of overt , collective challenges correspond to changes in rates of repression .
this strategy follows eli Berman and colleagues , who argue that first-difference equations augmented with controls for preexisting trends in the dependent variable can help ac- count for the selection of repression into areas with higher levels of dissent.83 to facilitate comparison with the first-difference equations as well as the analyses presented in the supplementary material , all mod- els in table 1 are estimated using ordinary least squares.84 Replications using negative binomial and zero-inflated negative binomial specifica- tions produced similar results .
the results broadly support the study ’ s two hypotheses .
coefficients and standard errors for repression of mobilization and repression of overt , collective challenges can be found in the top rows of table 1 .
Repression of mobilization is negatively and significantly correlated with subsequent overt , collective challenges in model 1 , which includes only the core covariates and basic controls .
the significant , negative relationship be- tween repression of mobilization and subsequent challenges proves robust to the inclusion of the additional controls ( model 2 ) , as well as to the incorporation of annual and department-level fixed effects ( model 3 ) .
all results suggest that when repression targets the clandestine mo- bilization activities of dissident organizers , it limits their capacity for coordinating subsequent challenges against the government .
turning to repression of overt , collective challenges , there is strong sup- port for the contention that this form of repression increases subsequent challenges .
across models 1–3 , repressing overt , collective challenges is associated with significant increases in challenges the following month 81 danneman and Ritter 2014 .
82 guatemala ’ s municipalities are grouped into twenty-two departments .
83 Berman , shapiro , and felter 2011 , 799. further attention is given to selection and endogeneity in the discussion section below , and in sullivan 2016 .
84 sullivan 2016. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 664 world politics when compared to what would be predicted had repression not taken place .
this evidence corresponds to the argument that repression di- rected against public challenges can actually improve opportunities for coordinating challenges against the government .
Within the analyses , the control variables perform largely as expected and reveal some additional information about the dynamics of overt , collective challenges in the country .
Both spatial-temporal lags of dis- sident behavior show significant correlations with municipal levels of overt , collective challenges .
Municipal indigenous population rates do not prove to be robustly correlated with dissent , even as this variable has been shown repeatedly to correlate with repression.85 interestingly , levels of democracy are negatively correlated with overt , collective chal- lenges , suggesting that fewer acts of dissent occurred as democracy im- proved .
and population is positively and robustly correlated with overt , collective challenges while municipal literate population rates have a negative sign , but the variable is significant only in model 2 .
Models 4–6 take further advantage of the time-series dynamics op- erating in the data by first-differencing the time-variant independent and dependent variables .
the results for both repression of mobilization 85 gulden 2002 ; sullivan 2012 ; sullivan 2014 ; sullivan 2015. table 1 cross-sectional tiMe-series estiMation of overt , collective challengesa 1 2 3 4 5 6 Repression of –0.115*** –0.116*** –0.112*** –0.108*** –0.108*** –0.107*** mobilization ( 0.012 ) ( 0.011 ) ( 0.012 ) ( 0.009 ) ( 0.008 ) ( 0.008 ) Repression of overt , 0.481*** 0.426*** 0.414*** 1.218*** 1.219*** 1.217*** collective challenges ( 0.036 ) ( 0.035 ) ( 0.036 ) ( 0.022 ) ( 0.023 ) ( 0.023 ) additional controls y y y y annual fixed effects y y department-level y y fixed effects differencing the y y y variables n 35,750 35,750 35,750 35,750 35,750 35,750 coefficients and standards errors in parentheses ; * p < .05 , ** p < .01 , ***p < .001 ( two-tailed test ) a all models include controls for lagged measures of overt , collective challenges and mobilization , and incorporate municipal-level random effects .
Models 2 , 3 , 5 , and 6 include the following additional controls : spatial-temporal lag of overt , collective challenges , spatial-temporal lag of mobilization , indigenous , literate , population , democracy .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 665 and repression of overt , collective challenges prove robust to this specifica- tion .
Municipal-specific trends in prior mobilization and overt , collective challenges do have significant correlations with contemporaneous rates of change in the dependent variable .
however , the inclusion of these trends does not strongly affect the core results .
across model speci- fications , rates of overt , collective challenges decreased systematically following repression targeting mobilization , while such rates increased systematically following repression targeting overt , collective challenges .
taken together , these results support both hypotheses and suggest that political repression can have divergent effects depending on the types of organizational behavior it targets .
the predicted effects are substantively important .
When dissidents mobilized without being targeted with repression , they were able to engage in overt , collective challenges in more than 50 percent of sub- sequent municipality-months .
When mobilization was repressed , the number drops to less than 10 percent.86 comparatively , when there was ongoing dissent but no overt , collective challenges were repressed , dissi- dents engaged in overt , collective challenges in approximately one-third of the subsequent municipality-months .
and when overt , collective challenges were repressed , the rate more than doubles .
there are lasting effects as well .
Because of the positive relationship between past and present dissident behavior , repression can set in mo- tion enduring escalatory or de-escalatory dynamics .
figure 1 presents dynamic forecasts ( with 95 percent confidence intervals ) for the pre- dicted rates of change in overt , collective challenges based on the speci- fications in model 6.87 the forecasts estimate the effects of a single act of repression observed at time t0 .
for the six months following an act of repression , rates of overt , collective challenges decrease if repression targeted mobilization and increase if repression targeted overt , collec- tive challenges .
discussion Returning to the core questions motivating this study , the analysis demonstrates connections between the organizational underpinnings of dissent and the effects of repression on future conflict .
Where the 86 in municipality-months where mobilization was repressed , the government repressed two mobi- lization events on average .
When overt , collective challenges were repressed , the government repressed an average of just over one event in that municipality-month .
87 forecasts were generated using the commands and methods created by Williams and Whitten 2012. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 666 world politics government can target mobilization , future challenges decrease .
Where the government responds to ongoing challenges with repression , con- flict escalates .
such results should give pause to population-centric approaches for resolving the conflict-repression nexus .
if the govern- ment is able to successfully eliminate the organizations responsible for coordinating overt , collective challenges , then aggrieved populations may have no one to turn to for backlash against the state .
in contrast , if mobilization is ongoing , even repression that selectively targets dis- sidents can lead to conflict escalation .
this last proposition is tested in the analysis above , which demonstrates robust , positive correlations between repression selectively targeted at overt , collective challenges and increases in subsequent challenges .
the supplementary material contains additional analyses comparing results from the organization- al-targeting approach to expectations derived from population-centric arguments.88 the models incorporate indiscriminate forms of repres- sion , consider issues of territorial control , and weigh the implications of executive job insecurity .
although these analyses are preliminary , the results support the theoretical primacy of the organizational-targeting model .
for instance , positive correlations between indiscriminate re- pression and subsequent overt , collective challenges become substan- 88 sullivan 2016. figure 1 dynaMic forecasts for dissident behavior in the afterMath of repression 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 t 1.25 1 .75 .5 .25 0 –.25 D o ve rt , c ol le ct iv e c ha lle ng es Repression of overt , collective challenges Repression of mobilization ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 667 tially weaker in settings without organized mobilization .
in contrast , the organizational-targeting results hold up robustly to the inclusion of population-centric measures .
the supplementary material also presents robustness checks con- sidering potential endogeneity in the repression-dissent relationship.89 here , the study supplements the primary analysis with an instrumental variables ( iv ) design .
this effort follows a recent trend of researchers seeking to identify plausibly exogenous effects in the repression-dissent relationship.90 the percentage of repressive events documented by lo- cal and international ngos ( in each municipality-month ) is used to in- strument for political repression .
the logic is that the publication of ngo reports likely informs governments about efforts to monitor their human rights practices , which may inspire changes in the location , se- verity , or form of subsequent repression ( without providing any new information to local dissident organizers ) .
the supplementary material considers issues of relevance , exogeneity , and exclusion in greater detail , but one important issue that warrants noting is that ngo reporting may be limited in areas with heavy repression .
the analyses attempt to ad- dress this concern by demonstrating that reporting does not correlate with preassignment levels of repression , and by controlling for measures of democracy.91 across model specifications , the iv results confirm the expectations of the argument .
extending the implications of the findings outside of guatemala re- quires considering important structural variables that may impact the government ’ s capacity to identify and repress mobilization , and should thus be significant predictors of the likelihood of a state descending into conflict .
a study such as this one , which investigates micrody- namic variation within a single case , has the ability to narrow in on and identify challenger responses to individual acts of repression .
But it also has limited capacity to examine the impact of macrolevel variables that could condition those responses .
although it is important to recognize that many relevant structural factors , such as democracy , state capacity , and civil war , are likely outcomes of government-challenger struggles , 89 as noted above , repression commonly occurs in response to increased challenges , which suggests important selection mechanisms whereby repression is occurring in areas that already have signifi- cantly different latent propensities for experiencing dissent .
to the extent that there is a positive rela- tionship between past and present dissident behavior that persists despite controls for lagged dissent , the remaining bias would influence the estimates of repression ’ s effects in a positive direction .
the effect would create a particularly hard test for hypothesis 1 ( regarding the repression of mobilization ) , while decreasing the probability of rejecting hypothesis 2 ( regarding the repression of overt , collec- tive challenges ) .
90 carey 2006 ; Young 2013 ; Ritter and conrad 2016 .
91 sullivan 2016. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 668 world politics examining how these factors condition subsequent strategic choices could provide clues to the broader generalizability of the findings .
in regard to democracy , the domestic democratic–peace literature suggests that democratic governments commit fewer repressive acts than their authoritarian or semidemocratic counterparts.92 But there exists debate over how democracy affects the repression of mobilization .
some recent work holds democracy as an indication that preemptive repression will not occur , while other work suggests that democracies may be more inclined to engage in this form of repression because it is difficult for a democratic public to observe.93 in regard to capacity , some governments simply do not have the ability to monitor mobilization and thus are unable to repress it.94 such states should be particularly prone to conflict escalation .
the results of auxiliary analyses ( presented the supplementary material ) are consistent with this argument.95 state capacity in guatemala is extremely unevenly distributed , and in some areas , such as the indigenous highlands , the guatemalan state only truly emerged during the decade under study .
Replicating the anal- yses in high capacity and low capacity regions reveals that repression directed at mobilization is most consistently associated with decline in overt , collective challenges in sites with strong state capacity .
Where capacity was the weakest , repressing mobilization did not appear to significantly decrease challenger behavior .
and when overt , collective challenges were repressed in low capacity areas , the most dramatic in- creases in subsequent challenges occurred .
these results suggest that future research should further investigate how governments make particular decisions about applying repressive force under different structural conditions and in response to differ- ent forms of organizational behavior , as well as examine how structural outcomes , such as democracy or state capacity , emerge from conflict .
92 davenport 2007a ; davenport 2007b .
93 cunningham 2004 ; davenport 2014 ; Ritter and conrad 2016 .
94 the data show that repression that targets mobilization activities is positively correlated with state capacity ( as measured by municipal population and literacy rates ) , which suggests that such be- havior is more likely to be observed in high capacity regions .
analyses using zero-inflated negative- binomial models provide further nuance to this point by first estimating whether or not it is possible for the government to repress mobilzation activities in a given municipality-month and then predict- ing how many acts of repression are likely , conditional on that possibility .
Results indicate that low levels of state capacity do not completely inhibit the government from repressing mobilization , but they might decrease the number of mobilization activities that are repressed .
95 sullivan 2016. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 669 conclusion governments routinely turn to repression as a means for protecting their rule from overt , collective challenges , such as strikes , protests , and targeted attacks .
at times , their efforts appear to succeed , diminishing challenges and helping to preserve the existing political order .
But gov- ernment coercion appears equally likely to fail , leading to an escalation of conflict and , potentially , to civil war or revolution .
this study argues that the impacts of political repression are conditional on the develop- ment of challenger organizations .
When governments are able to direct repression at clandestine mobilization activities , repression depletes the capacity for dissident organizations to coordinate overt , collective chal- lenges .
in contrast , when governments direct repression against ongoing overt , collective challenges , it leaves challenger organizations in place to escalate levels of dissent .
this article examines these arguments with statistical analysis of political repression in guatemalan municipalities from 1975 to 1985. unique data gathered from previously confidential police records are employed to examine the impact of repression target- ing different forms of organizational behavior .
the results confirm the expectations of the argument .
the findings speak to limitations of prior efforts to resolve the rela- tionship between repression and dissent , and in particular to population- centric theories of conflict .
arguments specifying repression ’ s impact on popular support need to acknowledge theoretically prior consider- ations of how repression interacts with dissident organizations .
in the presence of sustained mobilization , even selectively targeted repression can have divergent effects , depending on the types of organizational activities it targets .
and in the absence of challenger mobilization , the backlash predicted by many population-centric models becomes un- likely .
the findings also present insights into problems posed by re- cent work on the endogeneity of repression and dissent .
such research urges scholars to consider the strategic interactions that move a society away from an equilibrium characterized by preemptive repression ( and a lack of apparent dissent ) and toward an equilibrium in which states and challengers respond to one another with increased violence .
96 this sentiment is strongly echoed in this article .
Where existing research has remained largely agnostic about the form or content of preemptive repression and the types of organizations that are likely to emerge in the context of such repression , this study specifies the microdynamics underlying sequences of escalation and de-escalation .
96 Pierskalla 2010 ; Ritter 2014 ; Ritter and conrad 2016. ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 670 world politics When a government succeeds in repressing mobilization activities , it depletes capacities for public claims-making .
to the extent that this form of repression is responsible for stabilizing order , it is important to recognize that within apparently peaceful states , there are selection effects operating to limit the public articulation of particular ideologies or grievances .
subsequent research might consider the duration of these effects and the long-term implications of organizational destruction .
at the same time , where and when dissidents can conceal their mobiliza- tion activities and outpace government efforts to repress mobilization , their capacity to affect change and potentially overthrow the govern- ment is improved .
in the future , it will be important to study the vari- ables determining the types of movements that are more or less able to avoid repression of their mobilization .
understanding which types of movements succeed and which fail can help to explain the onset and escalation of political conflict .
suppleMentary Material supplementary material for this article can be found at http : //dx.doi.org/10.1017 /s0043 887116000125. references ahpn .
2010a .
“ Report on terrorist attacks and the Burning of the spanish em- bassy. ” fondo 51 , suBfondo 1 , seRie 2 , legaJo 4 , docuMen- to 2773479. guatemala city , guatemala : archivo histórico de la Policía nacional .
——— .
2010b .
“ orders to initiate investigation into individuals Responsible for Publishing Pamphlets inciting the local Population. ” fondo 30 , suBfon- do 1 , seRie 012 , caJa 300144 , legaJo 1 , docuMento 1757579. guatemala city , guatemala : archivo histórico de la Policía nacional .
——— .
2010c .
“ Report by a social organization on the Kidnapping and disap- pearance of community leaders. ” fondo 30 , suBfondo 1 , seRie 016 , caJa 300152 , legaJo 3 , docuMento 1836236. guatemala city , gua- temala : archivo histórico de la Policía nacional .
——— .
2010d .
“ Report on attack on Police station , guatemala city. ” fondo 30 , suBfondo 1 , seRie 012 , caJa 300131 , legaJo 2 , docuMen- to 1765746. guatemala city , guatemala : archivo histórico de la Policía nacional .
——— .
2010e .
“ Report on insurgent Bombs and Banners Placed on street. ” fondo 30 , suBfondo 1 , seRie 012 , caJa 300131 , legaJo 2 , docuMento 1765746. guatemala city , guatemala : archivo histórico de la Policía nacional .
——— .
2010f .
“ Report on attack of Police Patrol , guatemala city. ” fondo 30 , ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 671 suBfondo 1 , seRie 009 , caJa 300073 , legaJo 12 docuMento 1654614. guatemala city , guatemala : archivo histórico de la Policía nacional .
——— .
2010g .
“ Report on insurgents attack on Police station , chimaltenango. ” fondo 51 , suBfondo 02 , seRie 008 , caJa 510011 , legaJo 1 , docuMento 2737818. guatemala city , guatemala : archivo histórico de la Policía nacional .
——— .
2011 .
Del Silencio a la Memoria [ from silence to Memory ] .
guatemala city , guatemala : stewart R. Mott foundation .
angrist , Josh , and Jörn-steffen Pischke .
2009 .
Mostly Harmless Econometrics : An Empiricist ’ s Companion .
Princeton , n.J. : Princeton university Press .
archdiocese of guatemala .
1999 .
Guatemala : Never Again !
new York , n.Y. : orbis Books .
aspinall , edward .
2007 .
“ the construction of grievance : natural Resources and identity in a separatist conflict. ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 51 , no .
6 : 950–72 .
axelrod , Robert .
1984 .
The Evolution of Cooperation .
new York , n.Y. : Basic Books .
Ball , Patrick , Paul Kobrak , and herbert spirer .
1999 .
State Violence in Guatemala , 1960–1996 : A Quantitative Reflection .
Washington , d.c. : american associa- tion for the advancement of science .
Beissinger , Mark R. 2002 .
Nationalist Mobilization and the Collapse of the Soviet State .
cambridge , uK : cambridge university Press .
——— .
2007 .
“ structure and example in Modular Political Phenomena : the diffusion of Bulldozer/Rose/orange/tulip Revolutions. ” Perspectives on Poli- tics 5 , no .
2 : 259–76 .
Berman , eli , Jacob n. shapiro , and Joseph h. felter .
2011 .
“ can hearts and Minds Be Bought ?
the economics of counterinsurgency in iraq. ” Journal of Political Economy 119 , no .
4 : 766–819 .
Brockett , charles d. 2005 .
Political Movements and Violence in Central America .
cambridge , uK : cambridge university Press .
carey , sabine c. 2006 .
“ the dynamic Relationship between Protest and Repres- sion. ” Political Research Quarterly 59 , no .
1 : 1–11 .
——— .
2010 .
“ the use of Repression as a Response to domestic dissent. ” Po- litical Studies 58 , no .
1 : 167–86 .
carmack , Robert , ed .
1992 .
Harvest of Violence : The Mayan Indians and the Guate- malan Crisis .
norman , okla. : university of oklahoma Press .
chong , dennis .
1991 .
Collective Action and the Civil Rights Movement .
chicago , ill. : university of chicago Press .
commission for historical clarification .
1999 .
Memory of Silence .
Washington , d.c. : american association for the advancement of science .
condra , luke n. , and Jacob n. shapiro .
2012 .
“ Who takes the Blame ?
the stra- tegic effects of collateral damage. ” American Journal of Political Science 56 , no .
1 : 167–87 .
conrad , courtenay R. , and Will h. Moore .
2010 .
“ What stops the torture ? ” American Journal of Political Science 54 , no .
2 : 459–76 .
conrad , courtenay R. , and emily hencken Ritter .
2013 “ treaties , tenure , and torture : the conflicting domestic effects of international law. ” Journal of Politics 75 , no .
2 : 397–409 .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 672 world politics coppedge , Michael , angel alvarez , and claudia Maldonado .
2008 .
“ two Per- sistent dimensions of democracy : contestation and inclusiveness. ” Journal of Politics 70 , no .
3 : 632–47 .
cunningham , david .
2004 .
There ’ s Something Happening Here : The New Left , the Klan , and FBI Counterintelligence .
Berkeley , calif. : university of california Press .
cunningham , david , and John noakes .
2008 .
“ ‘ What if she ’ s from the fBi ? ’ ” the effects of covert forms of social control on social Movements. ” in Mathieu deflem and Jeffrey t. ulmer , eds. , Surveillance and Governance : Crime Control and Beyond .
Sociology of Crime Law and Deviance , vol .
10 .
Bingley , uK : emerald group Publishing limited:175–97 .
danneman , nathan , and emily hencken Ritter .
2014 .
“ contagious Rebellion and Preemptive Repression. ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 58 , no .
2 : 254–79 .
davenport , christian .
1995 .
“ Multi-dimensional threat Perception and state Repression : an inquiry into Why states apply negative sanctions. ” American Journal of Political Science 39 , no .
3 : 683–713 .
——— .
2007a .
“ Political order and state Repression. ” Annual Review of Political Science 10 : 1–23 .
——— .
2007b .
State Repression and the Domestic Democratic Peace .
cambridge , uK : cambridge university Press .
——— .
2014 .
How Social Movements Die : Repression and Demobilization in the Republic of New Africa .
cambridge , uK : cambridge university Press .
davenport , christian , hank Johnston , and carol Mueller , eds .
2005 .
Repression and Mobilization .
Minneapolis , Minn. : university of Minnesota Press .
davenport , christian , sarah a. soule , and david a. armstrong .
2011 .
“ Protest- ing While Black ?
the differential Policing of american activism , 1960 to 1990. ” American Sociological Review 76 , no .
1 : 152–78 .
daxecker , ursula e. , and Michael l. hess .
2013 .
“ Repression hurts : coercive government Responses and the demise of terrorist campaigns. ” British Jour- nal of Political Science 43 , no .
3 : 559–77 .
della Porta , donatella , and sidney tarrow .
2012 .
“ interactive diffusion : the co- evolution of Police and Protest Behavior with an application to transnational contention. ” Comparative Political Studies 45 , no .
1 : 119–52 .
doyle , Kate .
1999 .
The National Security Archive Guatemala Project .
at http : // nsarchive.gwu.edu/guatemala/ .
——— .
2007 .
“ the atrocity files : deciphering the files of guatemala ’ s dirty War. ” Harper ’ s Magazine .
december .
dugan , laura , and erica chenoweth .
2012 .
“ Moving beyond deterrence : the effectiveness of Raising the expected utility of abstaining from terrorism in israel. ” American Sociological Review 77 , no .
4 : 597–624 .
fearon , James d. , and david d. laitin .
2003 .
“ ethnicity , insurgency , and civil War. ” American Political Science Review 97 , no .
1 : 75–90 .
francisco , Ronald a .
1995 .
“ the Relationship between coercion and Protest : an empirical evaluation in three coercive states. ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 39 , no .
2 : 263–82 .
——— .
2004 .
“ after the Massacre : Mobilization in the Wake of harsh Repres- sion. ” Mobilization : An International Quarterly 9 , no .
2 : 107–26 .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 673 gaventa , John .
1982 .
Power and Powerlessness : Quiescence and Rebellion in an Ap- palachian Valley .
champaign , ill. : university of illinois Press .
garrard-Burnett , virgina .
2011 .
Terror in the Land of the Holy Spirit : Guatemala under General Efrain Rios Montt , 1982–1983 .
oxford , uK : oxford university Press .
goldstone , Jack a. , and charles tilly .
2001 .
“ threat ( and opportunity ) : Popular action and state Response in the dynamics of contentious action. ” in Ron- ald alminzade , ed. , Silence and Voice in the Study of Contentious Politics .
new York , n.Y. : cambridge university Press .
gould , Roger v. 1995 .
Insurgent Identities : Class , Community , and Protest in Paris from 1848 to the Commune .
chicago , ill. : university of chicago Press .
guberek , tamy .
2012 .
“ off the Record : concealing state violence in guatemala ’ s national Police , 1978–1985. ” M.a./M.sc .
thesis .
london school of econom- ics and Political science and columbia university .
gulden , timothy R. 2002 .
“ spatial and temporal Patterns in civil violence : guatemala , 1977–1986. ” Politics and the Life Sciences 21 , no .
1 : 26–36 .
gupta , dipak K. , harinder singh , and tom sprague .
1993 .
“ government coer- cion of dissidents : deterrence or Provocation ? ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 37 , no .
2 : 301–39 .
gurr , ted Robert , and Will h. Moore .
1997 .
“ ethnopolitical Rebellion : a cross- sectional analysis of the 1980s with Risk assessments for the 1990s. ” Ameri- can Journal of Political Science 41 , no .
4 : 1079–1103 .
hardin , Russell .
1982 .
Collective Action .
new York , n.Y. : Rff Press .
herreros , francisco , and henar criado .
2009 .
“ Preemptive or arbitrary : two forms of lethal violence in civil War. ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 53 , no .
3 : 419–45 .
hill , daniel , and zachary Jones .
2014 .
“ an empirical evaluation of explanations for state Repression. ” American Political Science Review 108 , no .
3 : 661–87 .
Jonas , susanne .
1996 .
“ dangerous liaisons : the us in guatemala. ” Foreign Policy 103 , summer : 144–60 .
Kalyvas , stathis n. 2006 .
The Logic of Violence in Civil War .
cambridge , uK : cambridge university Press .
Kalyvas , stathis n. , and Matthew Kocher .
2007 .
“ how ‘ free ’ is free-Riding in civil Wars ?
violence , insurgency , and the collective action Problem. ” World Politics 59 , no .
2 ( January ) : 177–216 .
Kilcullen , david .
2009 .
The Accidental Guerrilla : Fighting Small Wars in the Midst of a Big One .
oxford , uK .
oxford university Press .
——— .
2010 .
Counterinsurgency .
oxford , uK : oxford university Press .
Kocher , Matthew adam , thomas B. Pepinsky , and stathis n. Kalyvas .
2011 .
“ aerial Bombing and counterinsurgency in the vietnam War. ” American Jour- nal of Political Science .
55 , no .
2 : 201–18 .
Koopmans , Ruud .
1997 .
“ dynamics of Repression and Mobilization : the ger- man extreme Right in the 1990s. ” Mobilization : An International Quarterly 2 , no .
2 : 149–64 .
lafree , gary , laura dugan , and Raven Korte .
2009 .
“ the impact of British counterterrorist strategies on Political violence in northern ireland : com- paring deterrence and Backlash Models. ” Criminology 47 , no .
1 : 17–45 .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 674 world politics lewis , Janet .
2012 .
How Rebellion Begins : Insurgent Group Formation and Viability in Uganda .
Ph.d. diss .
harvard university .
lichbach , Mark .
1987 .
“ deterrence or escalation ?
the Puzzle of aggregate studies of Repression and dissent. ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 31 , no .
2 : 266–97 .
——— .
1995 .
The Rebel ’ s Dilemma .
ann arbor , Mich. : university of Michigan Press .
lyall , Jason M. K. 2006 .
“ Pocket Protests : Rhetorical coercion and the Mic- ropolitics of collective action in semiauthoritarian Regimes. ” World Politics 58 , no .
3 ( april ) : 378–412 .
——— .
2009 .
“ does indiscriminate violence incite insurgent attacks ?
evidence from chechnya. ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 53 , no .
3 : 331–62 .
——— .
2010 .
“ are coethnics more effective counterinsurgents ?
evidence from the second chechen War. ” American Political Science Review 104 , no .
1 : 1–20 .
Manz , Beatriz .
2005 .
Paradise in Ashes : A Guatemalan Journey of Courage , Terror and Hope .
Berkeley , calif. : university of california Press .
Marwell , gerald , and Pamela oliver .
1993 .
The Critical Mass in Collective Action : A Micro-Social Theory .
cambridge , uK : cambridge university Press .
Mason , t. david , and dale a. Krane .
1989 .
“ the Political economy of death squads : toward a theory of the impact of state-sanctioned terror. ” Interna- tional Studies Quarterly 33 , no .
2 : 175–98 .
Mcadam , doug .
1982 Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency : 1930–1970 .
chicago , ill. : university of chicago Press .
Mccarthy , John , and Mayer zald .
1977 .
“ Resource Mobilization and social Movements : a Partial theory. ” American Journal of Sociology 82 , no .
6 : 1212–41 .
Mcclintock , Michael .
1985 .
The American Connection Volume II : State Terror and Popular Resistance in Guatemala .
new York , n.Y. : zed Books .
Moore , Will h. 1995 .
“ action-Reaction or Rational expectations ?
Reciprocity and the domestic-international conflict nexus during the ‘ Rhodesia Prob- lem. ’ ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 39 , no .
1 : 129–67 .
——— .
1998 .
“ Repression and dissent : substitution , context , and timing. ” American Journal of Political Science 42 , no .
3 : 851–73 .
Morris , aldon d. 1984 .
Origins of the Civil Rights Movements : Black Communities Organizing for Change .
new York , n.Y. : simon and schuster .
nordas , Ragnhild , and christian davenport .
2013 .
“ fighting the Youth : Youth Bulges and state Repression. ” American Journal of Political Science 57 , no .
4 : 926–40 .
oliver , Pamela .
1984 .
“ if You don ’ t do it , nobody else Will : active and token contributors to local collective action. ” American Sociological Review 49 , no .
5 : 601–10 .
ostrom , elinor .
1990 .
Governing the Commons : The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action .
cambridge , uK : cambridge university Press .
Parkinson , sarah elizabeth .
2013 .
“ organizing Rebellion : Rethinking high-Risk Mobilization and social networks in War. ” American Political Science Review 107 , no .
3 : 418–32 .
Pierskalla , Jan h. 2010 .
“ Protest , deterrence , and escalation : the strategic calcu- lus of government Repression. ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 54 , no .
1 : 117–45 .
Raleigh , clionadh , and håvard hegre .
2009 .
“ Population size , concentration , ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. repression & dissident organizations 675 and civil War .
a geographically disaggregated analysis. ” Political Geography 28 , no .
4 : 224–38 .
Ritter , emily .
2014 .
“ Policy disputes , Political survival , and the onset and sever- ity of Repression. ” Journal of Conflict Resolution 58 , no .
1 : 143–68 .
Ritter , emily , and courtenay conrad .
2016 .
“ don ’ t Rain on My Protest : estimat- ing the effects of dissent on Repression. ” American Political Science Review 110 , no 1 : 85–99 .
sanford , victoria .
2004 .
Buried Secrets : Truth and Human Rights in Guatemala .
new York , n.Y. : Palgrave McMillan .
schirmer , Jennifer .
1998 .
The Guatemalan Military Project : A Violence Called De- mocracy .
Philadelphia , Pa. : university Pennsylvania Press .
scott , James .
1985 .
Weapons of the Weak : Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance .
new haven , conn. : Yale university Press .
shapiro , Jacob .
2013 .
The Terrorist ’ s Dilemma : Managing Violent Covert Organiza- tions .
Princeton , n.J. : Princeton university Press .
shapiro , Jacob n. , and david a. siegel .
2012 .
“ Moral hazard , discipline , and the Management of terrorist organizations. ” World Politics 64 , no .
1 ( January ) : 39–78 .
staniland , Paul .
2012 .
“ organizing insurgency : networks , Resources , and Rebel- lion in south asia. ” International Security 37 , no .
1 : 142–77 .
——— .
2014 .
Networks of Rebellion : Explaining Insurgent Cohesion and Collapse .
ithaca , n.Y. : cornell university Press .
stoll , david .
1993 .
Between Two Armies in the Ixil Towns of Guatemala .
new York , n.Y. : columbia university Press .
sullivan , christopher M. 2012 .
“ Blood in the village : local-level investigation of state Massacres. ” Conflict Management and Peace Science 29 , no .
4 : 373–96 .
——— .
2014 .
“ the ( in ) effectiveness of torture for combating insurgency. ” Journal of Peace Research 51 , no .
3 : 388–404 .
——— .
2015 .
“ undermining Resistance : Mobilization , Repression , and the enforcement of Political order. ” Journal of Conflict Resolution .
doi : 10.1177 /0022002714567951 .
——— .
2016. supplementary material .
at http : //dx.doi.org/10.1017/s004388 7116000125. tarrow , sidney .
1998 .
Power in Movement : Social Movements and Contentious Poli- tics .
cambridge , uK : cambridge university Press .
taylor , verta .
1989 .
“ social Movement continuity : the Women ’ s Movement in abeyance. ” American Sociological Review 54 , no .
5 : 761–75 .
tilly , charles .
1978 .
From Mobilization to Revolution .
new York , n.Y. : Mcgraw- hill .
——— .
2004 .
Social Movements , 1768–2004 .
Boulder , colo. : Paradigm Publish- ers .
Walsh , James , and James Piazza .
2010 .
“ Why Respecting Physical integrity Rights Reduces terrorism. ” Comparative Political Studies 43 , no .
5 : 551–77 .
Walter , Barbara .
2006 .
“ Building Reputation : Why governments fight some separatists but not others. ” American Journal of Political Science 50 , no .
2 : 313–30 .
Walter , eugene v. 1969 .
Terror and Resistance : A Study of Political Violence .
oxford , uK : oxford university Press .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. 676 world politics Ward , Michael , and Kristian gleditsch .
2008 .
Spatial Regression Models .
london , uK : sage Press .
Weld , Kristen .
2014 .
Paper Cadaver : The Archives of Dictatorship in Guatemala .
durham , n.c. : duke university Press .
Weinstein , Jeremy M. 2007 .
Inside Rebellion : The Politics of Insurgent Violence .
cambridge , uK : cambridge university Press .
Williams , laron K. , and guy d. Whitten .
2012 .
“ But Wait , there ’ s More !
Maxi- mizing substantive inferences from tscs Models. ” Journal of Politics 74 , no .
3 : 685–93 .
Wood , elisabeth Jean .
2003 .
Insurgent Collective Action and Civil War in El Salva- dor .
cambridge , uK : cambridge university Press .
Wood , lesley .
2007 .
“ Breaking the Wave : Repression , identity , and seattle tac- tics. ” Mobilization : An International Quarterly 12 , no .
4 : 377–88 .
Wood , Reed M. 2010 .
“ Rebel capability and strategic violence against civil- ians. ” Journal of Peace Research 47 , no .
5 : 601–14 .
Young , Joseph K. 2013 .
“ Repression , dissent , and the onset of civil War. ” Politi- cal Research Quarterly 66 , no .
3 : 516–32 .
zhukov , Yuri M. 2015 .
“ Population Resettlement in War theory and evidence from soviet archives. ” Journal of Conflict Resolution , 59 , no .
7 : 1155–85 .
ht tp s : // do i.o rg /1 0 .
10 17 /S 00 43 88 71 16 00 01 25 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 19 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 6 : 28 :0 4 , s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps : // w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s .
