Tavits_AmJourPoliSci_2015_BxRk.pdf
an0.Fl82W9UJ3mtmvWpCvYIt_Arq-Tavits_AmJourPoliSci_2015_BxRk.pdf.plain.html

The Effect of Inequality and Social Identity on Party Strategies Margit Tavits Washington University in St. Louis Joshua D. Potter Louisiana State University How do parties decide which issues to emphasize during electoral competition ?
We argue that the answer to this question depends on how parties of the left and of the right respond to economic inequality .
Increasing inequality shifts the proportion of the population falling into lower socioeconomic categories , thereby increasing the size of the electoral constituency that is receptive toward leftist parties ’ redistributive economic appeals .
In the face of rising inequality , then , leftist parties will emphasize economic issues in their manifestos .
By contrast , the nonredistributive economic policies often espoused by rightist parties will not appeal to this burgeoning constituency .
Rather , we argue , rightist parties will opt to emphasize values-based issues , especially in those cases where “ social demand ” in the electorate for values-based representation is high .
We find support for these relationships with hierarchical regression models that draw from data across hundreds of parties in a diverse set of the world ’ s democracies .
How do parties decide which issues to politicize ? While general left-right issues tend to domi-nate party agendas in many countries ( Adams , Merrill , and Grofman 2005 ; Benoit and Laver 2006 ; Grof- man 2004 ; Hix , Noury , and Roland 2006 ) , some parties choose to politicize a second , value-based issue dimension at least some of the time .
Indeed , parties ’ strategies may sometimes adhere to the “ salience theory ” of competi- tion where they “ compete by accentuating issues on which they have an undoubted advantage , rather than by putting forward contrasting policies on the same issues ” ( Budge , Robertson , and Hearl 1987 , 391 ) .
Our understanding of why this second dimension might be more salient on the agendas of some parties rather than others—or in some elections rather than in others—lags behind our understanding of party position taking on a generalized left-right dimension ( Adams 2012 ; Grofman 2004 ) .
Lit- tle is known about whether and how parties themselves attempt to shape the competitive space to their own ad- vantage by manipulating the salience of certain issues .
In this article , we take up this inquiry and ar- gue that parties politicize issues for strategic reasons .
Margit Tavits is Professor , Department of Political Science , Washington University in St. Louis , Campus Box 1063 , One Brookings Drive , St. Louis , MO 63130 ( tavits @ wustl.edu ) .
Joshua D. Potter is Assistant Professor , Department of Political Science , Louisiana State University , 250 Stubbs Hall , Baton Rouge , LA 70803 ( jpotter @ lsu.edu ) .
The authors would like to thank Lawrence Ezrow , Zeynep Somer-Topcu , Henning Finseraas , Jim Garand , Dan Tirone , Guillermo Rosas , Cristian Pérez Muñoz , Rick Wilson , Bill Jacoby , and five anonymous reviewers at AJPS for several helpful suggestions .
Margit Tavits would like to acknowledge funding from the Weidenbaum Center on the Economy , Government , and Public Policy at Washington University in St. Louis .
Replication materials are available at the AJPS Data Archive on Dataverse ( http : //dvn.iq.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/ajps ) .
Their strategies are , in turn , constrained by social struc- ture , including the level of income inequality and the presence of identity-based social cleavages in the elec- torate .
We build on a growing literature that attempts to understand voter preferences for redistribution .
Previ- ous studies have explored why poor people do not always prefer redistribution ( Alesina and Glaeser 2004 ; Amat and Wibbels 2009 ; Dahlberg , Edmark , and Lundqvist 2011 ; De La O and Rodden 2008 ; Eger 2010 ; Finseraas 2009b , 2012 ; Scheve and Stasavage 2006 ; Schmidt and Spies 2014 ; Shayo 2009 ; Stegmueller et al .
2012 ) , and why people do not always vote in accordance with their economic interests ( De La O and Rodden 2008 ; Hu- ber and Stanig 2007 , 2011 ; Roemer 1998 ; Vernby and Finseraas 2010 ) .
The main explanation is that con- cerns over noneconomic issues or values — especially those related to religiosity , ethnicity , and nationalism– can distract these voters and draw their attention away from their economic interests ( Alesina and Glaeser 2004 ; De La O and Rodden 2008 ; Finseraas 2009a ; Huber and Stanig 2007 ; Roemer , Lee and Van Der Straeten 2007 ; Shayo 2009 ; Vernby and Finseraas 2010 ) .
American Journal of Political Science , Vol .
59 , No .
3 , July 2015 , Pp .
744–758 C©2014 , Midwest Political Science Association DOI : 10.1111/ajps.12144 744 INEQUALITY , IDENTITY , AND PARTY STRATEGIES 745 Alternatively , these same concerns may alter people ’ s preferences over redistribution and thereby their support for parties advocating redistribution ( Alesina and Glaeser 2004 ; Cramer Walsh 2012 ; Eger 2010 ; Huber and Stanig 2007 , 2011 ; Schmidt and Spies 2014 ; Stegmueller et al .
2012 ) .
If these studies are correct , then it directly fol- lows that parties—acting out of their own electoral self— interests–may want to capitalize on this voter propensity for distraction by strategically drawing voters ’ attention away from their economic interests and toward values .
Showing that parties engage in such strategic behavior is the central and novel contribution of our article.1 More specifically , we argue the following .
First , we argue that the electoral fortunes of leftist parties mostly depend on the extent to which they are able to struc- ture political competition around economic interests , or the class cleavage ( Przeworski and Sprague 1986 ; Roe- mer , Lee , and Van Der Straeten 2007 ; Tavits and Letki 2014 ; Vernby and Finseraas 2010 ) .
As the share of voters with leftist economic preferences increases , politicizing economic interests becomes more beneficial to parties of the left .
Because this share is likely to increase as the level of income inequality increases , it follows that the left has an electoral incentive to politicize economic in- terests when inequality is high .
Conversely , as inequality rises , the voting constituency harboring rightist economic preferences is likely to shrink , thereby making interest- based party competition detrimental to the right .
Faced with the threat of stagnating vote share , rightist parties face incentives to draw voter attention away from inter- ests altogether and focus on values .
We further argue that politicizing values is easier , and therefore more likely to be pursued by the right , in some social contexts than in others .
Namely , value-based appeals find better traction in the presence of identity-based social cleavages , such as ethnicity , religiosity , and nationalism .
We use data for nearly 450 parties from 41 electoral democracies across Western , Eastern , and Central Europe as well as the other Anglican countries and Japan , South Korea , Turkey , and Israel between 1945 and 2010 and find support for these arguments .
Specifically , we find that as income inequality increases , leftist parties put more em- phasis on traditional economic interest–based appeals , whereas rightist parties do not .
For rightist parties , on the other hand , income inequality is associated with a signif- 1To be sure , previous studies have hinted at the possibility that par- ties may have incentives to strategically manipulate issue salience but have not explored it directly ( Alesina and Glaeser 2004 ; Amat and Wibbels 2009 ; Roemer 1998 , but see also Larsen 2011 , who concludes the opposite ) .
Tavits and Letki ( 2014 ) come closest to our study but focus only on postcommunist Europe and on party polarization rather than issue salience .
icant increase in their emphasis on values-based political issues ( while this effect is commensurately nonexistent for leftist parties ) .
In a second series of analyses , we also find that rightist parties are especially likely to politicize values in more diverse and more religious countries , as well as in those countries that are experiencing high inflows of foreign-born individuals .
This study locates itself in the intersection of the re- cent comparative political economy literature on the po- litical consequences of inequality as well as the electoral behavior literature on vote choice and issue salience .
Our findings provide important implications to both sets of literature , and to our understanding of party strategies and representation .
We discuss these implications in more detail in the concluding section .
Inequality and Party Strategies In this article , we conceive of party competition on two di- mensions : economic interests and social values .
Interest- based representation refers to the classic economic left- right dimension of social protectionism versus market liberalism .
Value-based competition gives prominence to noneconomic or cultural issues related to identity , val- ues , and populist appeals ( Benoit and Laver 2006 ; Laver 2001 ; Marks et al .
2006 ; Schofield and Sened 2006 ) .
We argue that which of these two dimensions a party chooses to politicize at any given time depends on two factors : ( a ) the electoral incentives of the party and ( b ) the un- derlying social structure ( i.e. , the strength of class- and identity-based social cleavages ) .
Our argument consists of a number of steps , and we will explain each in turn .
First , on the economic interest–based issues , we ex- pect low-income citizens to prefer leftist and high-income voters to prefer rightist economic policies .
This is be- cause party policies—especially with regard to taxes and spending affect low- and high-income individuals very differently .
Poorer voters stand to benefit from leftist ( and lose from rightist ) economic policies , whereas the oppo- site is true for wealthier individuals.2 Second , we expect that increased inequality is associated with an increase in the number of individuals who are economically worse off .
This , in turn , implies that while positions on either end of the economic dimension are likely to appeal to some groups , the group favoring the leftist , social pro- tectionist position is likely to be larger and increasing 2This is a central argument in the literature linking income in- equality to party polarization on the general left-right dimension ( Garand 2010 ; McCarty , Poole , and Rosenthal 2006 ; Pontusson and Rueda 2008 ) .
746 MARGIT TAVITS AND JOSHUA D. POTTER as inequality increases .
Both of these expectations are in line with the classic tax and transfer model , according to which more voters prefer leftist policies as the overall level of income inequality increases ( Finseraas 2009b ; Meltzer and Richard 1981 ; Milanovic 2000 ; Roemer 1998 ; Romer 1975 ) .3 As a result , leftist parties are more likely than par- ties of the right to derive greater electoral benefit from interest-based voting when inequality increases ( Finser- aas 2009b ; Przeworski and Sprague 1986 ; Tavits and Letki 2014 ) .
Given this , a vote-maximizing strategy for leftist parties during times of high inequality is to emphasize economic interest–based issues.4 H1 : During periods of heightened inequality , left- ist parties are more likely to emphasize the eco- nomic interest–based dimension , whereas this effect will not hold for rightist parties .
Increased inequality combined with the leftist strat- egy of politicizing the economic dimension of party com- petition is likely to be detrimental to rightist parties ( Tavits and Letki 2014 ) .
If parties of the right also em- phasized economic interests , then the result would be party polarization ( this logic reflects studies of polariza- tion in the American context ) .
However , given the pre- viously discussed reasoning , the right would also most likely see its vote share shrink .
This is likely to prompt at least some rightist parties to seek a potentially more profitable electoral strategy : drawing voter attention away from economic issues.5 That is , we argue that increased income inequality—and the resulting increases in support 3Finseraas ( 2009b ) provides recent cross-national evidence that inequality is positively associated with demand for redistribution , and that the median income citizen is sensitive to inequality .
4Pontusson and Rueda ( 2010 ) have recently argued that leftist par- ties take more leftist policy positions in response to inequality only when the level of turnout among lower-income voters is high .
Note that this does not necessarily undermine our hypothesis because we are focusing on emphasis rather than position taking .
In our supporting information ( SI ) 9 , we show that turnout exerts only a substantively weak and statistically questionable impact on leftist parties ’ propensity to emphasize economic issues during periods of high inequality .
Furthermore , we demonstrate that parties of the left might actually be especially likely to emphasize the economic dimension when turnout is low , perhaps in an effort to mobilize these very voters .
5For our argument to work , we must assume that parties of the left and the right think about economic policies in the same way—at least insofar as they impact the decisions of poorer voters .
If rightist parties , for instance , generally ( and genuinely ) thought that more conservative economic policies would elicit support from poorer voters , then we would expect ( 1 ) both types of parties to increase their emphasis on economic interests in the face of rising inequal- ity and ( 2 ) greater polarization in positions on economic interests .
Previous work has failed to demonstrate that inequality is associ- ated with polarization outside of the United States ( Adams , Green , and Milazzo 2012 ; Kenworthy and McCall 2008 ; Schneider 2004 ) .
for left-wing economic policies—generates incentives for at least some rightist parties to mobilize voters around noneconomic issues .
An active and salient value-based dimension means that at least those low-income voters who have strong preferences over both the economic di- mension and the values dimension may face a trade-off between voting based on interests versus values .
For example , poor but culturally conservative vot- ers face conflicting pressures when both dimensions are politically salient .
They would be cross-pressured to vote for the left on interests , but for the right on values .
As scholars have previously argued , the two dimensions are not always equal : It may be more difficult to compromise on values than on interests ( Riker 1982 ) .
This further suggests that by strategically activating the value-based dimension , the rightist parities have a chance of attract- ing at least some votes , which in a purely interest-based competition would have gone in support of the left ( see Roemer , Lee , and Van Der Straeten 2007 ; Tavits and Letki 2014 ) .
This dynamic has been prevalently discussed in the American context by Frank ( 2004 ) and in follow-up work from Bartels ( 2008 ) and Cramer Walsh ( 2012 ) .
Additionally , existing research in the comparative context also supports the assumption that poor voters may be “ distracted ” from following their economic pref- erences when voting in the presence of moral , religious , or identity-based concerns ( Alesina and Glaeser 2004 ; Amat and Wibbels 2009 ; De La O and Rodden 2008 ; Finseraas 2009a ; Huber and Stanig 2007 ; Roemer , Lee , and Van Der Straeten 2007 ; Scheve and Stasavage 2006 ; Shayo 2009 ; Vernby and Finseraas 2010 ) .
Finseraas ( 2009a ) shows that , in Western Europe , the potential share of cross-pressured voters is not negligible , but averages about one-third of the electorate and in some cases reaches as high as 74 % .
Furthermore , an increasing number of studies recognize that the salience of the second dimension , even if it per- tains to identities , can be strategically manipulated ; that is , political actors can strategically influence the extent to which values-based concerns enter into voting deci- sions ( Chandra and Wilkinson 2008 ; Hale 2008 ; Wilkin- son 2004 ) .
In sum , given this voter propensity to be dis- tracted , our expectation is that when inequality increases , rightist parties will attempt to strategically draw voter Regarding emphasis , we show in SI 6 that leftist and rightist parties agree on what to do in the face of rising inequality : On the economic dimension , both types of parties emphasize prointervention and de-emphasize promarket statements , and on the values dimension , both emphasize right-leaning and de-emphasize left-leaning state- ments .
The difference—and the crux of our theoretical story—is that the effect is markedly more substantial for leftist parties on interests and for rightist parties on values .
INEQUALITY , IDENTITY , AND PARTY STRATEGIES 747 attention away from economic interests and orient their attention toward values.6,7 H2 : During periods of heightened inequality , right- ist parties are more likely to emphasize the values-based dimension , whereas this effect will not hold for leftist parties .
The Role of Societal Demand While increased income inequality incentivizes rightist parties to politicize values-based issues , we further argue that this instrumental strategy is more successful—and therefore more likely to be pursued—in some social con- texts than in others .
The extent to which such appeals find traction in the electorate is likely to depend on the “ soci- etal demand ” for political representation on values-based issues .
By “ demand , ” we mean the underlying level of re- ceptivity in the electorate toward political representation predicated on values-based appeals .
Put differently , and from the perspective of parties and their electoral strate- gies , this “ demand ” might be considered the potentiality of electorally successful values-based representation .
This demand , we argue , depends on the presence or absence of latent groups in society ( Amat and Wibbels 2009 ; Tavits and Letki 2014 ) .
Specifically , we argue that group-based identities , such as ethnicity and religion , provide a social basis for values-based appeals ( including nationalism , morality , 6It might be argued that inequality between groups rather than between individuals prompts rightist parties to emphasize values to a greater or lesser extent ( Baldwin and Huber 2010 ) .
For our purposes , between-groups inequality is a less useful concept for two reasons .
First , it can only take on larger values in ethnically diverse societies ; otherwise , there are no groups to compare .
We are interested in developing a theory that will apply in both homo- geneous and heterogeneous societies ; thus , we focus on individual- level inequality .
Secondly , as between-groups inequality increases , economic divisions overlap increasingly with ethnic divisions .
In this case , the predictions about rightist party behavior are unclear because their economic constituency closely resembles their social constituency .
Even still , we demonstrate empirically in the SI 5 that our results hold while controlling for between-groups inequality as developed by Baldwin and Huber ( 2010 ) .
7One might argue that when inequality increases , leftist parties might also want to politicize both interests and values .
However , leftist parties can not easily emphasize the values dimension due to credibility concerns ( Budge et al .
2001 ; Petrocik 1996 ) , and previous research shows that the electoral success of leftist parties tends to rely on the politicization of economic interests alone ( Bartolini 2000 ; Przeworski and Sprague 1986 ) .
We take up this issue in greater detail–both theoretically and empirically—in our SI 6 , where we show that leftist parties pull away from left-leaning values and specifically toward prointerventionist economic policies .
We also show , in SI 7 , that leftist parties shift emphasis toward interests specifically at the expense of values .
and group rights ) to gain substantial traction in the elec- torate .
This is in line with existing research that shows that identity-based cleavages significantly condition people ’ s attitudes toward redistribution ( or leftist parties and their economic policies in general ) .
Support for redistribution is lower in diverse societies ( Alesina and Glaeser 2004 ) ,8 among nationalist individuals ( Shayo 2009 ) , and among religious individuals ( De La O and Rodden 2008 ; Huber and Stanig 2011 ; Scheve and Stasavage 2006 ) .
The rea- son for this is that where social cleavages are present , the share of potentially cross-pressured voters—those who , because of their identities , harbor strong preferences on the noneconomic dimension—is likely to be greater .
By providing a potentially receptive audience for identity- and value-based appeals , these latent social cleavages offer an especially attractive opportunity structure for instru- mental politicians to prime voters to vote on the basis of values , not interests .
In short , while high income inequal- ity may prompt rightist parties to politicize noneconomic issues in any context , they are especially likely to do so in the presence of group-based identities .
Consider , first , ethnicity .
The presence of minority populations provides a fertile ground for rightist parties to make values-based appeals to draw voter attention away from their material concerns .
For example , appealing to the electorate based on group rights ( e.g. , threats to the status of the majority population by extending citizen- ship to minorities ) or traditional values ( e.g. , threats to the native language/culture by elevating a minority lan- guage/culture to an official status ) might be an electorally profitable strategy in Estonia , Spain , or the Balkans— countries with substantial minority populations–but not necessarily in Scandinavia , which is relatively homoge- neous .
Existing literature provides two microlevel mech- anisms for this expectation .
One is that voter animosity toward out-groups prompts such strong emotional reac- tions from voters that they are willing to forgo their eco- nomic interests and vote based on values ( Finseraas 2009a ; Roemer , Lee , and Van Der Straeten 2007 ; Shayo 2009 ; Vernby and Finseraas 2010 ) .
Alternatively , this animosity toward out-groups or strong feelings of nationalism can alter the preferences of low-income voters over redistri- bution : They may oppose redistribution ( and abandon the left ) because in their mind , the members of the out- group are undeserving and exert a drag on the welfare state ( Alesina and Glaeser 2004 ; Eger 2010 ; Huber and Stanig 2007 , 2011 ; Schmidt and Spies 2014 ; Stegmueller et al .
2012 ) .
The jury is still out on which of these 8See also Eger ( 2010 ) , who shows that this effect also holds within one country , but across different counties , and Dahlberg , Edmark , and Lundqvist ( 2011 ) , who provide a causal test of this argument .
748 MARGIT TAVITS AND JOSHUA D. POTTER mechanisms is at work ( possibly both ) ,9 but this ques- tion of which mechanism is not relevant for our purposes because the implication for party behavior will be identi- cal in either case .
In addition to historical minorities , recent literature , especially in the context of Western Europe , has pointed out the relevance of immigration as a way by which eth- nic and racial diversity in these countries has increased over time ( Burgoon , Koster , and van Egmond 2012 ; Fin- seraas 2009a , 2012 ; Schmidt and Spies 2014 ; Vernby and Finseraas 2010 ) .
In these studies , the role of immigra- tion ( i.e. , share of foreign-born population ) is similar to the role of ethnic diversity in lowering support for re- distribution and interest-based voting : Immigration and the accompanying nationalism may distract voters ’ at- tention away from their economic interests .
Alternatively , immigration may alter voters ’ preferences on the eco- nomic dimension , making them support rightist rather than leftist policies .
Therefore , in addition to the presence of historical minority populations , the size of the immi- grant population may also offer an opportunity for the rightist parties to draw voters ’ attention away from their economic interests .
Based on the existing literature , grow- ing immigration is most likely to serve as the social basis of value-based appeals , perhaps especially so in Western Europe .
Alongside ethnicity , another social identity that can be politically mobilized is religion ( Amat and Wibbels 2009 ; De La O and Rodden 2008 ; Scheve and Stasavage 2006 ; Solt , Habel , and Grant 2011 ) .
The religious cleavage can take two different forms : ( 1 ) religious-secular divide , and ( 2 ) religious fractionalization .
Both cases produce groups of voters whose voting behavior can potentially be manipulated by politicizing identity- and value-based appeals .
A similar logic to the one described in the case of ethnic diversity also applies here : Religiosity can force poor voters to vote based on their concerns over values ( De La O and Rodden 2008 ) .
Alternatively , it can al- ter their preferences over redistribution because religion functions as an alternative to the welfare state both on the psychological and material level ( Scheve and Stasavage 2006 , see also Karakoc and Baskan 2012 ; Solt , Habel , and Grant 2011 ) .
Therefore , where distinct religious identities exist in society ( e.g. , as is the case in Ireland or Poland ) , parties of the right ( those disadvantaged with the increased salience of income inequality ) are likely to turn away from the interest dimension and predicate their campaigns more 9Finseraas ( 2009a ) finds support for the former but not for the latter ; Eger ( 2010 ) finds support for the latter but does not test the former .
on moral and religious values .
This is true not only in the presence of a religious-secular divide , but also in the case of religious diversity .
With different sizable religious groups , it is easier to politicize moral and cultural issues than in a society that adheres to similar religious norms .
In general , then , value-based appeals are likely to have higher resonance in settings where these issues can be at least partially targeted against , or set in contrast to , the ( perceived ) values of other groups .
In such a setting and in the presence of high income inequality , the right not only has the incentive but also the opportunity to politicize a values-based dimension.10 H3 : During periods of heightened inequality , right- ist parties are more likely to emphasize the values-based dimension ; this is more likely the higher the “ social demand ” for values-based representation .
We now turn to a discussion of our data set before outlin- ing the multiple steps we employ to test each of our three hypotheses .
Data Our theoretical argument is applicable to those electoral democracies , where parties compete primarily based on policies and programs .
The actual empirical scope of our analysis extends to those countries included in the Comparative Manifesto Project ( CMP ; Budge et al .
2001 ; Klingemann et al .
2006 ; Volkens et al .
2012 ) because these data offer the most appropriate measure of our dependent variable for the largest number of countries .
Specifically , our dependent variable ( Emphasis on either the economic interest-based or the social values-based dimensions of political competition ) requires data on political parties ’ election manifestos.11 We are specifically interested in the level of intensity with which a party stresses its positions , 10We focus on rightist ( and not leftist ) parties ’ ability to cross- pressure voters because , in line with previous literature , we argue that lower socioeconomic classes ( i.e. , those constituencies that grow dramatically during periods of high inequality ) are more likely than upper classes to be politically conflicted on economic interests and values ( De La O and Rodden 2008 ) .
The case could be made that during periods of low inequality , leftist parties could similarly attempt to cross-pressure more wealthy constituents with values-based ( but presumably secular and multicultural ) appeals , but , as we noted earlier , this argument conflicts with previous findings and also runs against the empirical evidence we present below .
Hypothesis 3 does , however , relate to a more general logic that party strategies are affected by a combination of social variables and party features ( Burgoon 2012 ; Henjak 2010 ) .
11Descriptive information on all variables is included in SI 4 .
INEQUALITY , IDENTITY , AND PARTY STRATEGIES 749 rather than those positions themselves .
As our theoretical logic implies , parties will draw attention to their ideolog- ical positions—whether extreme or moderate—as being salient , vote-winning policy orientations under certain economic and social conditions .
The CMP allows us to measure this idea with its codings of party election plat- forms .
As the authors note , “ the main information ” ob- tained from their data is “ the relative emphasis parties give to the different messages they wish to transmit to electors ” ( Klingemann et al .
2006 , 116 ) .
This makes the CMP data uniquely suitable for our purposes .
Relying on these data allows us to include informa- tion on nearly 450 parties from 41 countries between 1945 and 2010.12 Only about half of these countries are advanced Western democracies .
While not offering global coverage , our analysis includes a fairly diverse set of elec- toral democracies from different regions at different lev- els of democratic development—conditions that enhance the generalizability of our findings .
The CMP database counts , for each party in each election , the frequency of rhetoric on fine-grained politi- cal issues.13 The disaggregated conceptual codings of the CMP allows researchers to combine these fine-grained issue counts into their own broader categories that repre- sent both “ economic interest ” and “ social values–based ” dimensions of political competition.14 And as we are in- terested in the frequency with which a party makes refer- ence to either the interest or the values dimension—rather than its actual left or right position on these dimensions— we do not distinguish between “ left-leaning ” and “ right- 12Our analysis includes the following countries : Albania , Australia , Austria , Belgium , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Bulgaria , Canada , Croatia , Cyprus , Czech Republic , Denmark , Estonia , Finland , France , Ger- many , Great Britain , Greece , Hungary , Iceland , Ireland , Israel , Italy , Japan , Korea , Latvia , Lithuania , Luxembourg , Malta , Moldova , Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway , Poland , Portugal , Romania , Slovenia , Spain , Sweden , Switzerland , Ukraine , and United States .
From the original set of CMP cases , we excluded those countries with problematic experiences with democratic rule ( such as Azer- baijan , Belarus , and Mexico ) .
A few additional countries were dropped because of the limited cross-national coverage of some of our other variables .
13Although the CMP database has recently faced criticisms of in- tercoder reliability , lack of estimates of uncertainty , and moving benchmarks ( Benoit and Laver 2007 ) , the CMP team has performed tests that establish its high level of reliability ( Budge and Pennings 2007 ; Klingemann et al .
2006 ) .
Additionally , the CMP is still the comparative database with the best coverage across cases and years and remains widely utilized by scholars of comparative political parties .
Finally , concerns about the CMP generally point to the presence of measurement error in the model ’ s covariates , which would work against our recovering support for our hypothesized relationships .
Even granting such a claim of attenuation bias , then , the fact that we find consistently strong results in the face of this should lend additional credibility to the argument .
14We discuss these dimension codings at great length in SI 1. leaning ” positions ( as is typical in manifesto-based re- search ) .
Therefore , in order to measure Emphasis on each of the two dimensions , we record , for each party in each election , the total sum of all CMP components on that dimension .
The theoretical range of the emphasis scale is from 0 to 100 .
On our economic interests dimension , Emphasis ranges from 0 to 83.3 ( with a mean of 26.2 ) ; on our social values dimension , it ranges from 0 to 88.9 ( with a mean of 14.4 ) .15 Explanatory Variables For coding the first of our main independent variables— a dummy variable for Right party–we follow the exist- ing literature ( Finseraas 2010 ) and use the CMP clas- sification of parties into families .
We code as right = 1 those parties that the CMP classified as liberal , Christian Democratic , conservative , or nationalist in nature .
Other major party families were coded as right = 0.16 Taking this approach is appropriate for our purposes because it gives us an independent measure of the ideological na- ture of the party .
The measure is based on how the party prefers to be portrayed overall , and not on any specific current policy promises .
Therefore , it avoids problems with endogeneity—unlike drawing on , say , expert place- ments or manifesto positions , which would contain many of the same components that already go into our opera- tionalization of the dependent variable .
Our second main independent variable—Economic inequality—is measured as the gross ( pretax ) national- level Gini coefficient , and yearly values for this variable were taken from the Standardized World Income Inequal- ity Database , ( SWIID ; Solt 2009 ) .17 For each election year , we pulled the pretax Gini coefficient from the previous calendar year so as to allow both parties and voters enough time to internalize their economic reality in the lead-in to the election.18 Although our sample includes a limited number of countries , the summary statistics on our in- 15In a robustness test in SI 6 , we further disaggregate the “ interests ” and “ values ” dimensions into their traditional leftist and rightist components and illustrate that our theoretical intuitions hold up even when examining these more fine-grained indicators .
16Party families that are difficult to fit into the traditional left-right dichotomy ( e.g. , coalitions , diverse alliances , and special issue and agrarian parties ) were dropped from the analysis .
17As a robustness check , in SI 8 , we follow Pontusson and Rueda ( 2010 ) , Atkinson and Piketty ( 2007 ) , and Leigh ( 2007 ) and use the share of wealth held by the top 1 % of wage earners .
This variable also comes from the SWIID .
18Where this was not possible , we took Gini values from the most chronologically proximate year to the election .
The details of this coding are outlined in SI 2 .
750 MARGIT TAVITS AND JOSHUA D. POTTER equality variable are not terribly distinct from the world at large .
The mean level of gross inequality in the SWIID data set is 44.3 ( interquartile range of 37.8 to 50.2 ) com- pared to a mean of 41.7 ( interquartile range of 37.6 to 46.7 ) in our subset of the data .
Thus , we can be confident that the availability of the CMP data is not biasing our selection of countries in terms of inequality .
For our first set of analyses , we control for several party and country attributes that might be argued to in- fluence the extent to which our hypothesized relation- ships hold .
First , for individual parties , we control for Party age ( measured in years ) , Party size ( measured as a party ’ s share of the national-level vote ) , and whether or not a party is a Niche party ( i.e. , ecologist , communist , or nationalist party ) .
At the country level , we control for New democracy , the Effective number of electoral parties ( ENEP ) , and Economic performance .
More information on the coding of these variables can be found in SI 3 .
Ad- ditionally , as a robustness check , we estimate versions of these models with several more ( statistically insignificant ) control variables ; the results are reported in SI 5 .
In the second section of our analysis , we turn to an examination of Hypothesis 3 , where we require measures of “ societal demand ” within the voting population for values-based appeals from political parties , which , we argued , is reflected in the extent of group-based social identities in a given society .
Specifically , we argued that ethnicity ( i.e. , ethnic diversity and the share of immigrant population ) and religion ( i.e. , religiosity and religious di- versity ) are likely to condition the effect of inequality on the behavior of rightist parties .
We take our measures of Ethnic and Religious fraction- alization from Alesina et al .
( 2003 ) , who have compiled what is perhaps the largest and most thorough collection of country-level data along these variables.19 Our mea- sure of Religiosity comes from the World Values Survey and is the proportion of the population that attends some religious observance at least once per week ( World Values Survey 2009 ) .
Finally , our measure of the prevalence of immigration is the percentage of the country ’ s popula- tion that is Foreign-born and comes from the statistical tables of the World Bank.20 In the case of this variable , 19However , we should note that the results we present below hold equally well if we instead substitute Fearon ’ s measures of either cultural or ethnolinguistic fractionalization ( Fearon 2003 ) .
20Our longitudinal coverage of country-years in the CMP data is more extensive than any of these data sources .
For the ( national- level ) measures of ethnic and religious fractionalization , we simply coded every election in a country as taking on the one ( repeated ) value .
For religiosity , we extended the 1981 survey wave from the World Values Survey back to the earliest post-WWII election ( but our results are substantively similar if we do not do this ) .
we conduct separate tests on ( a ) the full set of countries and ( b ) only those countries of Western Europe , where we expected the relationship to be particularly robust .
Each of these variables , in interaction with inequality , should exhibit positive coefficients .
Because the coverage across countries and years of each of these variables is so different ( and due to collinearity concerns ) , we opt for separate re- gression analyses examining each social demand variable individually.21 Analysis The unit of observation in our analysis is the amount of emphasis a particular party places on either the interests or values dimension in a given election in a given country .
Due to the natural hierarchies in the data , we choose to employ a multilevel linear model , which allows us to ex- plicitly model random intercepts both at the level of the party and at the level of the country .
While the intercept term in traditional linear regression represents the under- lying value taken by the dependent variable when all ex- planatory variables are held at zero , the random intercepts in our model indicate that for any given country and any given party , there are different baseline propensities that modify this traditional observation-level intercept .
So , for example , we can examine the extent to which–ignoring our other covariates—parties within a particular country are more likely to emphasize the interests dimension sim- ply by virtue of all residing in that country .
Notationally , we estimate two versions of the following model , one for the interests and a second for the values dimension:22 emphasisc pe = 0 + 1inequal i ty + 2ideolog y + 3 ( inequal i ty × ideolog y ) + [ contr ol s ] + c + p + c pe , where p and c are party-level and country-level ran- dom intercepts across which we will retrieve measures of variance p and c , respectively .
We also include the battery of control variables described above .
These two 21However , in SI 11 , we also present the results of a unified “ social demand ” model that combines all of our demand indicators into a single additive metric .
This robustness check is discussed in detail below .
22As a robustness test , we also test both Hypotheses 1 and 2 si- multaneously by modeling a party ’ s level of emphasis of interests relative to its emphasis of values .
These results are presented in SI 7 and corroborate our mainline results .
INEQUALITY , IDENTITY , AND PARTY STRATEGIES 751 models evaluate the empirical evidence in support of the relationships we posit in Hypotheses 1 and 2.23 , 24 After discussing the results of our first two models , we then restrict our attention to rightist parties only in an effort to evaluate the “ demand side ” argument we developed surrounding Hypothesis 3 .
As discussed above , we operationalize these demand size pressures in various ways and present separate hierarchical models to evaluate each specification .
Specifically , we will be estimating five models of the following form : emphasisc pe = 0 + 1inequal i ty + 2 [ demand ] + 3 ( inequal i ty × [ demand ] ) + [ contr ol s ] + c + p + c pe , where [ demand ] is a placeholder for each of our opera- tionalizations : ethnolinguistic fractionalization , religious fractionalization , religiosity , and the percentage of the population that is foreign-born ( both in the full set of countries and then again restricted to just Western Eu- rope ) .
We first present our mainline comparison between left and right parties on both the interests and values di- mension before then turning to right-leaning parties on the values dimension .
In what follows , we focus on pre- senting intuitive , visual depictions of coefficient estimates and marginal effects .
Following recent calls in the field of political science to stress the substantive “ takeaway ” points of regression analyses , we opt for visual—rather than numerical—presentations ( Gelman , Pasarica , and Dodhia 2002 ; Kastellec and Leoni 2007 ; King , Tomz , and Wittenberg 2000 ) .
We include tables of regression output for our rightist-party-specific regressions in SI 10 .
The Economic and Values Dimensions The first two models we estimate correspond to ( a ) the economic interests–based dimension and ( b ) the social values–based dimension of political competition .
We are particularly interested in the extent to which the interac- tion between inequality and the right party dummy qual- ifies the relationship between inequality and the level of emphasis a party places on either the economic or values dimensions .
Our expectation is that this interaction effect for the “ interests model ” will be negatively signed ( mean- ing that right-leaning parties will de-emphasize this dimension when inequality increases ) and that this in- teraction will be positively signed in the “ values model ” 23All models were estimated in Stata 12 using the xtmixed com- mand .
24Including country fixed effects or yearly time trends also does not change the results .
TABLE 1 Baseline Hierarchical Models Testing Hypotheses 1 and 2 Emphasis on Emphasis on Interests Values Rightist Party 3.55 −1.18 ( 3.66 ) ( 3.22 ) Inequality 0.17∗∗ -0.05 ( 0.07 ) ( 0.06 ) Rightist Party × −0.15∗ 0.18∗∗ Inequality ( 0.09 ) ( 0.08 ) New Party −1.72∗∗ −0.77 ( 0.72 ) ( 0.64 ) Niche Party -2.25∗∗∗ 2.95∗∗∗ ( 0.89 ) ( 0.98 ) Party Size 0.03 −0.05∗∗ ( 0.03 ) ( 0.02 ) GDP Change 0.13∗ −0.16∗∗∗ ( per capita ) ( 0.07 ) ( 0.06 ) ENEP 0.45∗∗ −0.22 ( 0.19 ) ( 0.17 ) New Democracy 0.30 0.86 ( 0.94 ) ( 0.81 ) Intercept 19.93∗∗∗ 15.12∗∗∗ ( 3.19 ) ( 2.76 ) ̂c pe 8.67 6.62 ̂p 4.55 6.54 ̂c 4.17 4.26 Nc pe 1765 1765 Np 441 441 Nc 41 41 Note : The dependent variable is the level of emphasis a party places on the economic interest-based and values–based dimension in a given election .
Standard errors appear in parentheses below coeffi- cient estimates .
∗significant at 10 % level , ∗∗significant at 5 % level , and ∗∗∗significant at 1 % level .
( meaning that right-leaning parties will place greater em- phasis on this dimension during periods of high inequal- ity ) .
The results of the two models appear in Table 1 and include not only estimates of each coefficient and standard errors around estimates , but also measures of variance—and the number of groups—at each level in the model .
There is greater variance in position emphasis across parties than across countries , which is expected given that parties tend to be more idiosyncratic than countries .
Turning now to our specific covariates of interest , we recover significant support for both Hypothesis 1 and Hypothesis 2 .
In the first model , increasing inequality increases emphasis on the interest dimension , but this effect is countered by a virtually identically sized ( and 752 MARGIT TAVITS AND JOSHUA D. POTTER significant ) coefficient on the interaction between Right- ist party and Inequality .
In fact , since this is an interaction model , the coefficient on the inequality variable indicates the positive effect of inequality on emphasis for leftist parties only ( i.e. , when Rightist party = 0 ) .
This effect is positive and statistically significant ( coeff .
= 0.17 , s.e .
= 0.1 , p < .05 ) and indicates that driving up inequality results in leftist parties increasing their level of emphasis on issues related to interests .
The marginal effect of in- equality on emphasis for the rightist parties ( i.e. , when Rightist party = 1 ) is easily calculated by adding the coeffi- cients on the inequality variable and the interaction term : 0.17 + ( −0.15 ) = 0.02 , s.e .
= 0.07 , p = .86 .
Since this marginal effect is not even close to being statistically sig- nificant , we infer that inequality has no detectable effect on rightist parties ’ emphasis on economic interest–based issues .
For the second model , and again in accordance with our theory , we find the exact opposite : Increasing inequality causes rightist parties to place greater empha- sis on values-based representation , as becomes evident when calculating the respective marginal effect : −0.05 + 0.18 = 0.13 , s.e .
= 0.06 , p = .02 .
No such effect is recov- ered for parties of the left , as indicated by the insignificant coefficient on the inequality variable in the second model ( coeff .
= −0.05 , s.e .
= 0.06 , p = .40 ) .
How substantial are these effects ?
For a generic right party , increasing inequality across its observed interquar- tile range ( 37.6 to 46.7 ) results in a somewhat paltry increase of 4 % in its level of emphasis on the interests dimension .
Contrast this with a generic left party , for which a similar increase in inequality results in a sub- stantial 24 % increase in its emphasis on the interests dimension .
Depending on a generic leftist party ’ s un- derlying proclivity to emphasize the interests dimension in the first place , this 24 % increase can move it from the 25th to the 50th percentile ( or from the 50th to the 75th percentile ) of our distribution of observed inter- ests emphasis positions .
The effect is more striking on the values-based dimension , where a similar shift in in- equality across the interquartile range prompts a generic right party to increase its level of emphasis on the values dimension by 32 % while at the same time prompting a generic left party to actually decrease its level of emphasis by 23 % .
Illustrative cases of these relationships abound .
For example , the Social Democratic Party ( SPD ) in Germany , a left-leaning party , was faced with two radically differ- ent economic realities in the 1972 and 1983 elections .
In the former case , Germany was experiencing high levels of inequality ( near the upper bound of our interquartile range on this variable ) , whereas in the latter election , in- equality was considerably lower ( near the lower bound of our interquartile range of values ) .
Accordingly , the SPD dropped from a 32.2 to a 27.0 on our measure of em- phasis on interests , or a move from the 75th percentile to about the 50th percentile in our data set .
Similarly , in back-to-back elections in the 1960s , Sweden ’ s level of in- equality increased across the full interquartile range and , not surprisingly , the Communist Party ’ s level of empha- sis on economic interests jumped from 27.3 to 46.6 ( or roughly from the 50th to the 95th percentile on our distri- bution of emphasis levels ) .
A similar story can be found in the case of the Czech Republic , which underwent an 18 % increase in its inequality level between its parliamentary elections in 1998 and 2002 .
The two left parties in this system , on average , responded by increasing their level of emphasis on the interest dimension by 29 % of their 1998 levels , whereas the four right parties , on average , did not substantively adjust their level of emphasis ( less than a 6 % increase ) .
The Values Dimension in Context As we argued in the logic supporting Hypothesis 3 , in the face of rising economic inequality , not all rightist parties will be equally able to pivot to values-based appeals .
In- deed , to some extent , this ability should be conditional on the latent “ social demand ” for this type of represen- tation , and this demand should follow from a number of characteristics of the electorate .
As discussed above , we have operationalized each of these demand-side prereq- uisites and interacted them with economic inequality in an effort to model how rightist parties choose to empha- size the values-based political dimension .
Due to issues of collinearity with these demand-side factors—and because examining each factor ’ s separate effect on values empha- sis is of substantive theoretical interest—we estimate a separate model for each factor.25 As a casual glance at Figure 1 and Figure 2 indi- cates , the choice of demand-side factor does not matter : Accounting for any one of the four factors very clearly exerts a noticeable and important qualifying effect on the relationship between inequality and a generic rightist party ’ s inclination to emphasize values-based issues .
The marginal effects plots on these conditional relationships 25In SI 11 , however , we standardize each factor and add it into a common metric .
This “ unified ” social demand variable actually strengthens our results , but it is conceptually more difficult to interpret .
In an alternative analysis , we also included each of the social demand indicators ( together with their interactive terms with inequality ) in the same model .
The coefficient estimates on the three interaction terms remained similar in direction ( positive ) and substantive size .
This suggests that pairing high values on any two of our “ demand ” variables ( or all three ) will result in higher expected emphasis on values than registering a high value on only one of them .
INEQUALITY , IDENTITY , AND PARTY STRATEGIES 753 FIGURE 1 Marginal Effect of Economic Inequality on the Emphasis of the Values-Based Dimension for Rightist Parties ( Conditional on Ethnic Fractionalization , Religious Fractionalization , and Religiosity ) Note : Point estimates are surrounded by 95 % confidence interval bands .
Observed values are marked with ticks along the x = 0 horizontal .
Figures are based on regressions reported in Table SI.10 .
indicate that a minimum level of demand must exist in a population before rightist parties can hope to invoke values-based appeals as salient competitive strategies .
All of the marginal effects lines slope upward , the vast ma- jority of each line exists above the x = 0 horizontal line , and the effects themselves are generally discernible from zero at a 95 % level of confidence over the values where most of our observations lie.26 26The regression results that underlie these graphics can be found in SI 10 .
In order to convey some information about the dis- tribution of the data , we have included a rug of observed values for the conditioning variable along each x = 0 hor- izontal line ( and the x-axis itself ranges from the mini- mum to the maximum on each conditioning variable ) .
When looking at religious fractionalization ( the middle panel of Figure 1 ) , the relationship is discernible from zero for more than 50 % of the rightist party observations in our data set .
The two models estimating the quali- fying effect of the percentage of the population that is foreign born-simply reinforces the common trend across 754 MARGIT TAVITS AND JOSHUA D. POTTER FIGURE 2 Marginal Effect of Economic Inequality on the Emphasis of the Values-Based Dimension for Rightist Parties ( Conditional on Percent of the Population Foreign-Born ) Note : Point estimates are surrounded by 95 % confidence interval bands .
Observed values are marked with ticks along the x = 0 horizontal .
Figures are based on regressions reported in Table SI.10 .
all of these variables : Right-leaning parties can only be expected to pivot to values-based appeals when a baseline level of demand for this type of representation has been met in the electorate at large.27 As expected , we find that this effect is particularly salient in Western Europe , where it is discernible from zero at a 95 % level of confidence when the percentage of the population exceeds 10 % .28 In the case of religiosity , which we measure as frequent church attendance , the marginal effect across nearly the entire interquartile range ( i.e. , the middle 48 % of the data ) is statistically discernible from zero at a 95 % level of confidence ( see the bottom panel of Figure 1 ) .
At espe- cially high levels of church attendance–in excess of 70 % of the population–the effect disappears .
As there are exceed- ingly few countries with this level of church attendance , however , we would argue that there is insufficient leverage to recover the effect , even if one existed .
To be more specific , increasing inequality can be ex- pected to drive up rightist parties ’ emphasis on values- 27This relationship disappears in Panel 1 of Figure 1 above the 45 % mark .
However , as we discussed above , we expected a slightly weaker overall relationship in Panel 1 when compared to Panel 2 for theoretical reasons .
28We also return robust and intuitive results related to niche parties and a party ’ s electoral size .
Because these fall outside of the main line of our discussion , we report these results in SI 12. based dimensions only once ethnic fractionalization and religious fractionalization are above 0.2 and 0.35 , respec- tively .
This means that the relationship between inequal- ity and values-based emphasis holds less well ( or not at all ) in markedly homogeneous countries such as Korea , Japan , Finland , and Poland ( all of which fall below these points ) , but it should hold particularly well in countries such as Lithuania , Spain , New Zealand , and the United States ( all of which fall above ) .
For religiosity , which we measure by the percentage of the population regularly attending church , the effect is discernible above the 15 % mark .
For highly secular countries , then , such as Sweden , Denmark , and Iceland , the relationship between inequal- ity and values-based emphasis is less salient , whereas with more religious countries , such as the United States , Italy , and Portugal , the effect holds .
Finally , related to the per- centage of the population that is foreign-born , the positive relationship between inequality and values-based empha- sis is statistically discernible from zero when more than 10 % of the population is foreign-born .
Whereas countries like , say , Denmark , Norway , and the United Kingdom fell below this 10 % threshold in the 1970s and 1980s , all three countries now have foreign-born populations well in excess of 10 % .
Not surprisingly , these countries saw right-leaning parties pivot to values-based representation in the 1990s and 2000s .
INEQUALITY , IDENTITY , AND PARTY STRATEGIES 755 While discussing additional concrete examples for all of these variables would move beyond our space con- straints , we settle for highlighting some illustrative exam- ples from the ethnic fractionalization model .
We discuss cases that all exhibit average levels of economic inequality , so as to illustrate the power of ethnic fractionalization as a qualifying variable on rightist parties ’ choice of emphasis on the values-based dimension .
We can begin with ethni- cally homogeneous countries such as Norway , Australia , and Italy .
All of these countries exhibit levels of ethnic fractionalization at the 25th percentile ( or lower end of the interquartile range ) .
In Norway in 1973 , for exam- ple , the Conservative Party ( H ) , the New People ’ s Party ( DLF ) , and the Liberal Party ( V ) all opted to place very little emphasis on values-based competition .
These three rightist parties register values of 10.3 , 13.2 , and 10.4 on our measure of emphasis , which are all near the bottom end of our interquartile range on this variable .
The situa- tion was similar with the Labour Party ( LPA ) in Australia in 1998 , which takes a value of 9.6 on values emphasis .
Finally , in another homogeneous country , Italy , a whole host of right-leaning parties ( PLI , DC , and PRI ) exhib- ited comparatively low levels of emphasis on values-based issues .
Contrast this with elections in Switzerland and the United States .
These country-election cases similarly ex- hibited average levels of inequality , but ethnic fraction- alization scores are more toward the 75th percentile .
In sharp contrast to the more homogeneous countries dis- cussed above , the rightist parties in Switzerland in the 1990s and early 2000s placed considerably greater em- phasis on the values dimension , with scores ranging from 21.8 and 35.7 to upwards of 58.2 ( all of these scores far ex- ceed the 75th percentile on our values emphasis variable ) .
A similar story took place with the Republican Party in the United States during the late 1980s and early 1990s , where it drew emphasis values of 19.9 , 20.7 , and 24.1 .
Clearly , the same level of inequality will not prompt right parties in different countries to behave in similar ways .
Rather , some stock must be taken of the underlying re- ceptiveness of the electorate toward values-based political competition.enlrg Conclusion We have shown that parties ’ electoral strategies are not confined to simple position taking and to electoral com- petition predicated solely on the traditional , economically based left-right dimension .
Rather , social structure— the combined effect of inequality and social identities— incentivizes parties ’ attempts to manipulate the salience of issues and , in some cases , move beyond the bound- aries of traditional economic interest–based competition .
Specifically , increased economic inequality creates larger constituencies for parties of the left when representation is predicated chiefly on economic issues .
While leftist par- ties , then , can be expected to place greater emphasis on the economic dimension , this tendency is not matched by rightist parties .
Instead of this , parties of the right , es- pecially in social contexts with significant identity-based cleavages , can pivot to other , values-based issues as a way of strategically maximizing their vote shares .
We find substantial cross-national empirical support for this reasoning .
Specifically , we find that inequality differentially impacts parties of the left and the right .
In the face of rising economic inequality , leftist parties place more emphasis on political issues comprising the eco- nomic interest–based dimension , whereas rightist parties do not .
Instead , rightist parties place greater emphasis on values-based issues—a strategy that is not emulated by the left .
Finally , by restricting our analysis to only parties of the right , we demonstrate that values-based electoral strategies are particularly salient when there is high “ social demand ” for such representation .
Where ethnic and reli- gious fractionalization are high , where a significant share of the population is overtly religious , or when sizable por- tions of the population are foreign-born , we can expect parties of the right to more readily opt for values-based electoral competition .
The implications of our findings are manifold and contribute to the literatures on comparative political economy , voting behavior , and party competition .
Specif- ically , in terms of the political economy literature and its recent focus on the political consequences of inequality , our findings imply that increased inequality does not nec- essarily lead to party polarization , which is the argument typically made in the American context ( Abramowitz and Saunders 2008 ; Garand 2010 ; McCarty , Poole , and Rosenthal 2006 ) , but not corroborated in the compar- ative context of multiparty democracy ( Adams , Green , and Milazzo 2012 ; Kenworthy and McCall 2008 ; Schnei- der 2004 ) .
Rather , it can lead to more values-based ap- peals from the right .
Such a strategy by the right may also explain why we do not necessarily see left-wing parties winning and redistributive policies being implemented as societies grow more unequal—a paradox with which the political economy literature continues to wrestle ( Lin- dert 2004 ; Pontusson and Rueda 2010 ) .
In terms of electoral behavior , our results are in line with the argument in the recent literature that at least some voters are facing competitive pressures at the polling booth .
They may be drawn to the left on some issues and 756 MARGIT TAVITS AND JOSHUA D. POTTER to the right on others .
Our findings suggest that parties believe such pressures to be real enough to guide their electoral strategies .
Future studies of electoral behavior may want to pay closer attention to the possibility that voter preferences on different issues are not independent of each other .
Our findings also contribute to our understanding of party competition .
Most importantly , they offer unique insight into a scholarship that links social cleavages to po- litical representation ( Duverger 1954 ; Lipset and Rokkan 1967 ; Sartori 1976 ) .
This literature has suffered from two deficiencies : first , that it maps social divisions into politi- cal representation , without attributing to political parties much in the way of agency ; and , second , that it has fo- cused on the number of parties that emerge from different social contexts as well as which social features of the elec- torate these parties tap into .
Related to the first point , we argue that our findings constitute new empirical evidence in favor of what other scholars have mainly discussed in theoretical terms : that parties are composed of “ political entrepreneurs ” and “ architects of political change ” and are always looking for ways to leverage social context into electorally viable strategies ( Riker 1986 ; Schofield and Sened 2006 ) .
More specifically , we would argue that our findings infuse parties with greater agency in constructing the parameters of political competition .
Related to the second point , our findings indicate that when it comes to the study of party systems more generally , economic realities mediate social divisions .
Suc- cinctly put , social cleavages will most likely be mani- fested in values-based representation when inequality is high .
This suggests that , under some conditions , party competition in electoral democracies , even in advanced Western countries , may gravitate toward value-based and group-based politics—a conclusion that is in line with other recent and ongoing work on group-based politics ( Amat and Wibbels 2009 ; Huber , Ogorzalek , and Gore 2012 ) .
It also suggests , however , that without income in- equality pushing rightist parties to adopt values-based appeals , social divisions may not result in identity-based representation .
Finally , the findings of our study also shed light on why the left tends to be relatively similar across differ- ent countries , but rightist parties vary significantly in the tone and timbre of their campaigns .
In some countries , the main right-wing parties are socially liberal and focus mostly on economic issues ( e.g. , the Liberal Party of Den- mark or Christian Democratic Party in Germany ) , while in others they are socially conservative with a focus on traditional moral values ( e.g. , the Law and Justice Party in Poland ) , and in still others they are strongly nationalist ( e.g. , the Swiss People ’ s Party ) .
We demonstrate that it is the interplay of socioeconomic diversity and preexisting identity-based cleavages that shape the nature of the right across countries , and sometimes within .
References Abramowitz , Alan I. , and Kyle L. Saunders .
2008 .
“ Is Polariza- tion a Myth ? ” Journal of Politics 70 ( 2 ) : 542–55 .
Adams , James .
2012 .
“ The Causes and the Electoral Conse- quences of Party Policy Shifts in Multiparty Elections : The- oretical Results and Empirical Evidence. ” Annual Review of Political Science 15 : 401–19 .
Adams , James , Jane Green , and Caitlin Milazzo .
2012 .
“ Has the British Public Depolarized Along with Political Elites ? ” Comparative Political Studies 45 ( 4 ) : 507–30 .
Adams , James , Samuel Merrill , and Bernard Grofman .
2005 .
A Unified Theory of Party Competition : A Cross-National Analysis Integrating Spatial and Behavioral Factors .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
Alesina , Alberto , Arnaud Devleeschauwer , William Easterly , Sergio Kurlat , and Romain Wacziarg .
2003 .
“ Fractionaliza- tion. ” Journal of Economic Growth 8 ( 2 ) : 155–94 .
Alesina , Alberto , and Edward L. Glaeser .
2004 .
Fighting Poverty in the U.S. and Europe : A World of Difference .
Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Amat , Francesc , and Erik Wibbels .
2009 .
“ Electoral Incentives , Group Identity , and Preferences for Redistribution. ” Center for Advanced Study in the Social Sciences Working Paper 246 .
Atkinson , Anthony B. , and Thomas Piketty , eds .
2007 .
Top In- comes over the Twentieth Century .
Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Baldwin , Kate , and John D. Huber .
2010 .
“ Economic versus Cultural Differences : Forms of Ethnic Diversity and Public Goods Provision. ” American Political Science Review 104 ( 4 ) : 644–62 .
Bartels , Larry .
2008 .
Unequal Democracy : The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age .
Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press .
Bartolini , Stefano .
2000 .
The Political Mobilization of the Euro- pean Left , 1860–1980 : The Class Cleavage .
Cambridge : Cam- bridge University Press .
Benoit , Kenneth , and Michael Laver .
2006 .
Party Policy in Mod- ern Democracies .
London : Routledge .
Benoit , Kenneth , and Michael Laver .
2007 .
“ Estimating Party Policy Positions : Comparing Expert Surveys and Hand- Coded Content Analysis. ” Electoral Studies 26 ( 1 ) : 90–107 .
Budge , Ian , Hans-Dieter Klingemann , Andreas Volkens , Judith Bara , and Eric Tanenbaum .
2001 .
Mapping Policy Preferences : Estimates for Parties , Electors , and Governments , 1945–1998 .
Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Budge , Ian , and Paul Pennings .
2007 .
“ Do They Work ?
Validat- ing Computerised Word Frequency Estimates against Policy Series. ” Electoral Studies 26 ( 1 ) : 121–29 .
Budge , Ian , David Robertson , and Derek Hearl , eds .
1987 .
Ideol- ogy , Strategy and Party Change : Spatial Analyses of Post-War INEQUALITY , IDENTITY , AND PARTY STRATEGIES 757 Election Programmes in 19 Democracies .
Cambridge : Cam- bridge University Press .
Burgoon , Brian .
2012 .
“ Inequality and Anti-Globalization Backlash by Political Parties. ” European Union Politics 14 ( 3 ) : 408–35 .
Burgoon , Brian , Ferry Koster , and Marcel van Egmond .
2012 .
“ Support for Redistribution and the Paradox of Immigra- tion. ” Journal of European Social Policy 22 ( 3 ) : 288–304 .
Chandra , Kanchan , and Steven Wilkinson .
2008 .
“ Measur- ing the Effect of ‘ Ethnicity. ’ ” Comparative Political Studies 41 ( 4/5 ) : 515–63 .
Cramer Walsh , Katherine .
2012 .
“ Putting Inequality in Its Place : Rural Consciousness and the Power of Perspective. ” Ameri- can Political Science Review 106 ( 3 ) : 517–32 .
Dahlberg , Matz , Karin Edmark , and Heléne Lundqvist .
2011 .
“ Ethnic Diversity and Preferences for Redistribution. ” CE- Sifo Working Paper Category 3 : Social Protection ( 3325 ) .
De La O , Ana L. , and Jonathan A. Rodden .
2008 .
“ Does Reli- gion Distract the Poor ?
Income and Issue Voting around the World. ” Comparative Political Studies 41 ( 4/5 ) : 437–76 .
Duverger , Maurice .
1954 .
Political Parties : Their Organization and Activity in the Modern State .
New York : Wiley & Sons .
Eger , Maureen A .
2010 .
“ Even in Sweden : The Effect of Immi- gration on Support for Welfare State Spending. ” European Sociological Review 26 ( 2 ) : 203–17 .
Fearon , James D. 2003 .
“ Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Coun- try. ” Journal of Economic Growth 8 ( 2 ) : 195–222 .
Finseraas , Henning .
2009a .
“ Anti-Immigration Attitudes , Sup- port for Redistribution , and Vote Choice in Europe. ” Nor- wegian Institute for Social Research Working Paper .
Finseraas , Henning .
2009b .
“ Income Inequality and Demand for Redistribution : A Multilevel Analysis of European Public Opinion. ” Scandinavian Political Studies 32 ( 1 ) : 94–119 .
Finseraas , Henning .
2010 .
“ What If Robin Hood Is a Social Conservative ?
How the Political Response to Increasing In- equality Depends on Party Polarization. ” Socio-Economic Review 8 ( 2 ) : 283–306 .
Finseraas , Henning .
2012 .
“ Poverty , Ethnic Minorities among the Poor , and Preferences for Redistribution in European Regions. ” Journal of European Social Policy 22 ( 2 ) : 164–80 .
Frank , Thomas .
2004 .
What ’ s the Matter with Kansas ?
How Con- servatives Won the Heart of America .
New York : Metropolitan Books .
Garand , James C. 2010 .
“ Income Inequality , Party Polarization , and Roll-Call Voting in the U.S. Senate. ” Journal of Politics 72 ( 4 ) : 1109–28 .
Gelman , Andrew , Cristian Pasarica , and Rahul Dodhia .
2002 .
“ Let ’ s Practice What We Preach : Turning Tables into Graphs. ” American Statistician 56 ( 2 ) : 121–30 .
Grofman , Bernard .
2004 .
“ Downs and Two-Party Conver- gence. ” Annual Review of Political Science 7 : 25–46 .
Hale , Henry E. 2008 .
The Foundations of Ethnic Politics : Sepa- ratism of States and Nations in Eurasia and the World .
Cam- bridge : Cambridge University Press .
Henjak , Andrija .
2010 .
“ Political Cleavages and Socio-economic Context : How Welfare Regimes and Historical Divisions Shape Political Cleavages. ” West European Politics 33 ( 3 ) : 474–504 .
Hix , Simon , Abdul Noury , and Gerard Roland .
2006 .
“ Dimensions of Politics in the European Parliament. ” American Journal of Political Science 50 ( 2 ) : 494– 520 .
Huber , John D. , Thomas K. Ogorzalek , and Radhika Gore .
2012 .
“ Democracy , Targeted Redistribution and Ethnic In- equality. ” Working Paper , Department of Political Science , Columbia University .
Huber , John D. , and Piero Stanig .
2007 .
“ Voting Polarization on Redistribution across Democracies. ” Working Paper , De- partment of Political Science , Columbia University .
Huber , John D. , and Piero Stanig .
2011 .
“ Church-State Sep- aration and Redistribution. ” Journal of Public Economics 95 ( 7/8 ) : 828–36 .
Karakoc , Ekrem , and Birol Baskan .
2012 .
“ Religion in Politics : How Does Inequality Affect Public Secularization ? ” Com- parative Political Studies 45 ( 12 ) : 1510–41 .
Kastellec , Jonathan P. , and Eduardo L. Leoni .
2007 .
“ Using Graphs Instead of Tables in Political Science. ” Perspectives on Politics 5 ( 4 ) : 755–71 .
Kenworthy , Lane , and Leslie McCall .
2008 .
“ Inequality , Public Opinion , and Redistribution. ” Socio-Economic Review 6 ( 1 ) : 35–68 .
King , Gary , Michael Tomz , and Jason Wittenberg .
2000 .
“ Mak- ing the Most of Statistical Analyses : Improving Interpreta- tion and Presentation. ” American Journal of Political Science 44 ( 2 ) : 347–61 .
Klingemann , Hans-Dieter , Andrea Volkens , Judith Bara , Ian Budge , and Michael McDonald .
2006 .
Mapping Policy Pref- erences II : Estimates for Parties , Electors , and Governments in Eastern Europe .
Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Larsen , Christian Albrekt .
2011 .
“ Ethnic Heterogeneity and Public Support for Welfare : Is the American Experience Replicated in Britain , Sweden , and Denmark ? ” Scandinavian Political Studies 34 ( 4 ) : 332–53 .
Laver , Michael .
2001 .
“ Position and Salience in the Policies of Political Actors. ” In Estimating the Policy Positions of Po- litical Actors , ed .
Michael Laver .
London : Routledge , 66– 75 .
Leigh , Andrew .
2007 .
“ How Closely Do Top Income Shares Track Other Measures of Inequality ? ” Economic Journal 117 ( 524 ) : 619–33 .
Lindert , Peter .
2004 .
Growing Public .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
Lipset , Seymour Martin , and Stein Rokkan .
1967 .
Party Systems and Voter Alignments : Cross-National Perspectives .
New York : Free Press .
Marks , Gary , Liesbet Hooghe , Moira Nelson , and Erica Ed- wards .
2006 .
“ Party Competition and European Integration in the East and West : Different Structure , Same Causality. ” Comparative Political Studies 39 ( 2 ) : 155–75 .
McCarty , Nolan , Keith T. Poole , and Howard Rosenthal .
2006 .
Polarized America : The Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches .
Cambridge , MA : MIT Press .
Meltzer , Allan H. , and Scott F. Richard .
1981 .
“ A Rational The- ory of Government Size. ” Journal of Political Economy 89 ( 5 ) : 914–27 .
Milanovic , Branko .
2000 .
“ The Median-Voter Hypothesis , In- come Inequality , and Income Redistribution : An Empirical 758 MARGIT TAVITS AND JOSHUA D. POTTER Test with the Required Data. ” European Journal of Political Economy 16 ( 3 ) : 367–410 .
Petrocik , John R. 1996 .
“ Issue Ownership in Presidential Elec- tions , with a 1980 Case Study. ” American Journal of Political Science 40 ( 3 ) : 825–50 .
Pontusson , Jonas , and David Rueda .
2008 .
“ Inequality as a Source of Political Polarization : A Comparative Analysis of Twelve OECD Countries. ” In Democracy , Inequality , and Representation : A Comparative Perspective , ed .
Pablo Bera- mendi and Christopher J. Anderson .
New York : Russell Sage Foundation , 312–353 .
Pontusson , Jonas , and David Rueda .
2010 .
“ The Politics of In- equality : Voter Mobilization and Left Parties in Advanced Industrial States. ” Comparative Political Studies 43 ( 6 ) : 675– 705 .
Przeworski , Adam , and John D. Sprague .
1986 .
Paper Stones : A History of Electoral Socialism .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press .
Riker , William H. 1982 .
Liberalism against Populism : A Con- frontation between the Theory of Democracy and the The- ory of Social Choice .
Prospect Heights , IL : Waveland Press .
Riker , William H. 1986 .
The Art of Political Manipulation .
New Haven , CT : Yale University Press .
Roemer , John E. 1998 .
“ Why the Poor Do Not Expropriate the Rich : An Old Argument in New Garb. ” Journal of Public Economics 70 ( 3 ) : 399–424 .
Roemer , John E. , Woojin Lee , and Karine Van Der Straeten .
2007 .
Racism , Xenophobia , and Distribution : Multi-Issue Pol- itics in Advanced Democracies .
Cambridge , MA : Russell Sage Foundation and Harvard University Press .
Romer , Thomas .
1975 .
“ Individual Welfare , Majority Voting , and the Properties of a Linear Income Tax. ” Journal of Public Economics 4 ( 1–2 ) : 163–85 .
Sartori , Giovanni .
1976 .
Parties and Party Systems .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
Scheve , Kenneth , and David Stasavage .
2006 .
“ Religion and Preferences for Social Insurance. ” Quarterly Journal of Polit- ical Science 1 ( 3 ) : 255–86 .
Schmidt , Alexander W. , and Dennis C. Spies .
2014 .
“ Do Parties ‘ Playing the Race Card ’ Undermine Natives ’ Support for Re- distribution ?
Evidence from Europe. ” Comparative Political Studies 47 ( 4 ) : 519–49 .
Schneider , Gerald .
2004 .
“ Is Everything Falling Apart ?
Left- Right Polarization in the OECD World after World War II. ” Paper presented at the workshop of the Polarization and Conflict Network , Barcelona .
Schofield , Norman , and Itai Sened .
2006 .
Multiparty Democ- racy : Elections and Legislative Politics .
Cambridge : Cam- bridge University Press .
Shayo , Moses .
2009 .
“ A Model of Social Identity with an Appli- cation to Political Economy : Nation , Class , and Redistribu- tion. ” American Political Science Review 103 ( 2 ) : 147–74 .
Solt , Frederick .
2009 .
“ Standardizing the World Income In- equality Database. ” Social Science Quarterly 90 ( 2 ) : 231–42 .
Solt , Frederick , Philip Habel , and J. Tobin Grant .
2011 .
“ Eco- nomic Inequality , Relative Power , and Religiosity. ” Social Science Quarterly 92 ( 2 ) : 447–65 .
Stegmueller , Daniel , Peer Scheepers , Sigrid Robteutscher , and Eelke de Jong .
2012 .
“ Support for Redistribution in Western Europe : Assessing the Role of Religion. ” European Sociolog- ical Review 28 ( 4 ) : 482–97 .
Tavits , Margit , and Natalia Letki .
2014 .
“ From Values to Inter- ests ?
The Evolution of Party Competition in New Democra- cies. ” Journal of Politics 76 ( 1 ) : 246–58 .
Vernby , Kare , and Henning Finseraas .
2010 .
“ Xenophobia and Left Voting. ” Politics and Society 38 ( 4 ) : 490–516 .
Volkens , Andrea , Onawa Lacewell , Pola Lehmann , Sven Regel , Henrike Schultze , and Annika Werner .
2012 .
The Manifesto Data Collection : Manifeso Project ( MRG/CMP/MARPOR ) .
Berlin : Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin fur Sozialforschung .
Wilkinson , Steven .
2004 .
Votes and Violence : Electoral Com- petition and Ethnic Riots in India .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
World Values Survey .
2009 .
“ World Values Survey 1981–2008 Official Aggregate. ” World Values Survey Association Aggre- gate File .
Madrid : ASEP/JDS .
Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher ’ s website : SI 1 : Coding the economic interests and values dimen- sions SI 2 : Coding economic inequality SI 3 : Coding the control variables SI 4 : Descriptive statistics SI 5 : Regression models including additional ( insignifi- cant ) control variables SI 6 : Separate dimension components of interests and values SI 7 : Modeling the relative balance between interests and values emphasis SI 8 : Including an alternative specification of inequality SI 9 : Leftist party specific model accounting for voter turnout SI 10 : Regression output for rightist party specific models SI 11 : Rightist party specific model with an aggregated measure of social demand SI 12 : Supplementary findings related to niche parties and party size
