Yang_JournMarketRes_2012_EKpX.pdf
a.UnXdHKUNisr0UpKOe8K8HMf50S-Yang_JournMarketRes_2012_EKpX.pdf.plain.html

Journal of Marketing Research Vol .
XLIX ( December 2012 ) , 954–966 © 2012 , American Marketing Association ISSN : 0022-2437 ( print ) , 1547-7193 ( electronic ) 954 XIAOJING YANG , HUIFANG MAO , and LAURA A. PERACCHIO∗ Many firms attempt to enhance experience consumption by facilitating the consumption outcome ( i.e. , the end state achieved , such as the final score of a basketball game ) and the consumption process ( i.e. , the course through which the end is achieved , such as how the game is played ) .
The authors propose that the roles of outcome and process in the evaluation of experience consumption are dependent not only on consumers ’ role in the experience ( participant vs. spectator ) but also on their self-construal ( independent vs. interdependent ) .
As a spectator ( e.g. , watching a game ) , independents ’ ( vs. interdependents ’ ) experience consumption evaluations are more likely to be influenced by outcome , while interdependent ( vs. independent ) consumers are more likely to be affected by process .
The reverse is true when consumers assume the role of a participant in the experience ( e.g. , playing a game ) .
The authors ’ theorizing is supported across three studies .
Keywords : experience consumption , process , outcome , self-construal , consumer role It ’ s Not Whether You Win or Lose , It ’ s How You Play the Game ?
The Role of Process and Outcome in Experience Consumption In the United States , as well as many other parts of the world , experience consumption , such as the pursuit of leisure and entertainment experiences , is increasing ( Cave 2010 ; Etgar 2008 ; Gilmore and Pine 2007 ) .
Many cultural institutions , including the Museum of Modern Art and Art Institute of Chicago , have reported a surge in attendance ( Cave 2010 ) , while entertainment at home , such as movie watching , has also increased ( Nielsen 2011 ) .
According to the Department of Labor ’ s ( 2011 ) time use survey , Amer- icans are spending less time shopping and buying prod- ucts and more time pursuing experiences .
Accordingly , Florida ( 2009 ) has identified “ a tipping point toward some- thing new , ” with a “ shift in the consumption bundle ” from “ material goods to experiences , ” labeling this phenomenon as “ experience consumption. ” *Xiaojing Yang is Associate Professor of Marketing , Sheldon B. Lubar School of Business , University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee ( e-mail : yangxiao @ uwm.edu ) .
Huifang Mao is Associate Professor of Market- ing , College of Business Administration , University of Central Florida ( e-mail : hmao @ bus.ucf.edu ) .
Laura A. Peracchio is Professor of Mar- keting , Sheldon B. Lubar School of Business , University of Wisconsin– Milwaukee ( e-mail : LPeracch @ uwm.edu ) .
The authors thank the JMR review team for their helpful guidance during the review process .
Gita Johar served as associate editor for this article .
The delivery and marketing of experience consump- tion differ from traditional product or service marketing in important ways ( Etgar 2008 ; Gilmore and Pine 2007 ) .
First , experience consumption includes process as a criti- cal element .
Many consumers pursue the consumption of experiences ( e.g. , watching a basketball game ) not only for a particular outcome ( e.g. , their favorite team wins the game ) but also for the process through which the outcome unfolds ( e.g. , an exciting game ) .
Second , in experience con- sumption , process and outcome can be inconsistent with , or orthogonal to , each other .
For example , a fan may watch a basketball game that is exciting and engaging , but the team the fan supports may lose the game .
In such situa- tions , it is important for marketers to know whether con- sumers ’ experience consumption evaluations are likely to be relatively favorable because of the enjoyable process or relatively unfavorable because of the unpleasant outcome .
In this article , we take a contingency view and explore the conditions that affect the importance of process and out- come on consumers ’ experience consumption evaluations .
Specifically , we propose a theoretical framework that exam- ines a situational factor ( i.e. , consumers ’ role in the experi- ence : spectator vs. participant ) and an individual difference variable ( i.e. , self-construal ) as moderators of the influence of process and outcome on consumers ’ experience con- sumption evaluations .
Process and Outcome in Experience Consumption 955 The remainder of this article proceeds as follows : We begin by reviewing the literature on experience consump- tion in marketing , consumer behavior , and psychology .
From these related literature streams , we build our frame- work in terms of the factors that moderate the impor- tance of outcome and process on experience consumption evaluations .
Across three studies , we test how the role of consumers in the experience ( spectator vs. participant ) and their self-construal moderate the effects of these two antecedents .
DETERMINANTS OF THE EVALUATION OF EXPERIENCE CONSUMPTION Consumption Outcome and Process The importance of outcome in experience consump- tion is well acknowledged in both marketing and social psychology literature ( e.g. , Omodei and Wearing 1990 ; Spreng , MacKenzie , and Olshavsky 1996 ) .
Research has long established that outcomes , or the gratifications of end goals , positively affect a person ’ s subjective experience ( Deci and Ryan 2000 ; Trope and Liberman 2003 ) .
Much research has found that favorable outcomes enhance expe- riences by providing closure and meaning to the activ- ity ( Csikszentmihalyi 1975 ; Omodei and Wearing 1990 ) , and consumers are more likely to engage in an experi- ence when desirable outcomes are expected ( Liberman and Trope 1998 ) .
Another important driver of experience consumption evaluations—namely , the process of consumption—has received relatively less attention in marketing .
Research in social psychology , however , argues that the specific course , or the process through which the end goals are gratified , contributes to positive feelings ( Csikszentmihalyi 1975 ; Trope and Liberman 2003 ) .
Positive processes enhance experiences by engaging consumers and promoting absorp- tion in activities such that people often are unaware of the passage of time or distractions from the external environ- ment ( Csikszentmihalyi 1975 ; Novak , Hoffman , and Yung 2000 ) .
In contrast , undesirable processes that bring forth pain or discomfort often deter consumers from consump- tion ( Liberman and Trope 1998 ) .
In an effort to understand the role of both the end state ( outcome ) and the course of activities leading to the end state ( process ) , extant literature has found empirical support for both types of antecedents as independent sources of a person ’ s evaluation of expe- riences ( Liberman and Trope 1998 ; Omodei and Wearing 1990 ) .
Accordingly , we adopt the view established in the literature and propose that both outcome and process drive evaluations of experience consumption .
Importantly , construal-level theory and means–end the- ory ( e.g. , Trope and Liberman 2003 ) offer some crucial insights into consumers ’ mental representations of the pro- cess and outcome of an experience .
These theories con- tend that process and outcome are associated with differ- ent levels of abstraction ( Trope and Liberman 2003 ; Zhao , Hoeffler , and Zauberman 2007 ) .
Specifically , the outcome aspect of an experience is more abstractly construed , while the process is more concretely perceived .
Compared with processes , outcomes of an experience ( ends ) entail more superordinate information , such as desirability , ultimate goals , and purpose ( Agrawal and Wan 2009 ; Trope and Liberman 2003 ) .
In contrast , processes , which lead to end states ( means ) , reveal more specific contextualized informa- tion regarding how the event unfolds and how the outcome is achieved .
Compared with outcomes , processes include subordinate information , such as instrumental goals , fea- sibility concerns , means , and constraints , and are often mentally represented with greater richness ( Agrawal and Wan 2009 ; Trope and Liberman 2003 ) .
In summary , out- comes reflect the superordinate “ why ” aspect of experience consumption and are relatively more abstract , while pro- cesses refer to the subordinate “ how ” aspects of experience consumption and are relatively more concrete ( Trope and Liberman 2003 ; Vallacher and Wegner 1989 ) .
We contend that both process and outcome contribute to consumers ’ evaluations of experience consumption and are associated with different levels of abstraction .
Our primary goal is to examine the moderating factors that influence the effect of these antecedents .
The next section introduces the consumer ’ s role ( spectator vs. actor ) as one such moderator .
The Moderating Role of Being a Spectator Versus a Participant in an Experience Consumers undertake a spectator role in some experi- ence consumption activities ( e.g. , watching a sports game , listening to a concert ) and a participant role in others ( e.g. , playing sports , singing karaoke ) ( Pine and Gilmore 1999 ) .
We anticipate that consumers focus on process and out- come to varying degrees as a spectator versus a participant when evaluating experience consumption activities .
This proposition is rooted in the actor–observer literature , which acknowledges that observers and actors focus on different factors ( i.e. , abstract , dispositional information vs. concrete , situational information ) , leading to contrasting views when explaining the same behavior or event ( Kelley and Michela 1980 ; Pronin and Ross 2006 ) .
According to the actor–observer literature , observers have a propensity to explain a behavior by referring to the target person ’ s general and abstract dispositions , traits , or capabilities , while concrete , contextualized , and situa- tional factors are often , to some extent , ignored ( Jones and Harris 1967 ; Jones and Nisbett 1972 ; Pronin and Ross 2006 ) .
Prior research has established this phenomenon , labeled as the “ fundamental attribution error ” ( Ross 1977 ) or the “ correspondence bias ” ( Gilbert and Malone 1995 ; Jones and Harris 1967 ) , as robust ( Jones 1979 ; Watson 1982 ) .
For example , researchers have shown that the ten- dency for observers to overly rely on abstract , disposi- tional information persists even in situations when they are aware of the social constraints imposed on the target per- son ( Gilbert and Malone 1995 ; Jones 1979 ) .
In contrast , actors are more likely to underscore the concrete , situ- ational factors shaping their own behaviors and are less likely to attribute happenings to abstract , dispositional traits ( Jones and Harris 1967 ; Jones and Nisbett 1972 ; Pronin and Ross 2006 ) .
A substantial amount of empirical evidence offers sup- port for this view ( e.g. , Nisbett et al .
1973 ; Pronin and Ross 2006 ) .
These studies demonstrate that though people tend to employ abstract , dispositional adjectives ( e.g. , calm , seri- ous ) to judge other people ( as observers ) , when rendering judgments about themselves ( as actors ) , they acknowledge that their behavior is constrained by the specific situation and deem the use of abstract , dispositional adjectives to be 956 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , DECEMBER 2012 less appropriate .
Moreover , research accounts for the actor– observer differences by the distinct motives actors and observers possess when explaining behaviors and events ( e.g. , Watson 1982 ) .
While observers are motivated to inter- pret others ’ behaviors in ways that allow them to better ascertain others ’ personality traits to predict their behav- iors in the future , actors are more compelled to understand their surrounding environment so that they can adapt more effectively .
Extrapolating these findings to a broader consumer cog- nition context , recent research has documented a construal- level difference between actors and observers ( e.g. , Trope and Liberman 2010 ) .
For example , Fiedler et al .
( 1995 ) demonstrate that people in general deploy more concrete linguistic terms to describe themselves while relying more on abstract words to depict others .
Likewise , Bar-Anan , Liberman , and Trope ( 2006 ) , employing the implicit associ- ation test , establish that people associate themselves with a concrete level of construal but others with an abstract level of construal .
Thus , people are more inclined to rely on con- crete information ( not only confined to situational factors ) when judging their own behaviors ( as actors ) but abstract information ( not only limited to dispositional traits ) when assessing others ’ behaviors ( as observers ) .
In accordance with the previous conclusion that the outcome ( process ) of experience consumption is rela- tively more abstract ( concrete ) , we expect that consumers will weigh these antecedents differently when evaluating experience consumption activities .
Specifically , spectators ( vs. participants ) , who rely more on abstract information , should be more influenced by the consumption outcome .
In contrast , participants ( vs. spectators ) , who are more ori- ented toward concrete factors , should be affected more by the consumption process .
In the next section , we propose a moderating factor ( i.e. , self-construal ) that further influ- ences this relationship .
The Moderating Role of Self-Construal Our predictions thus far are based primarily on the actor–observer studies conducted in Western cultures , in which people generally retain a chronic independent self- construal .
Recent research suggests that the “ fundamental attribution error ” or the “ correspondence bias ” does not universally hold across cultures in which people possess different self-construals .
Indeed , a considerate amount of evidence shows that people from Eastern interdependent cultures are less likely to be influenced by these effects ( e.g. , Masuda and Kitayama 2004 ; Miller 1984 ; Miyamoto and Kitayama 2002 ) .
In accordance with evidence that actor–observer differ- ences may be culturally specific , we postulate that con- sumers ’ self-construal further interacts with their consumer role to influence evaluations of experience consumption .
In what follows , we review the literature on self-construal and then provide our rationale for why the type of self- construal consumers possess further moderates the effect of outcome and process in experience consumption .
Specifi- cally , compared with independent people , who focus more on abstract information as spectators but concrete fac- tors as participants , interdependent spectators ( observers ) tend to render “ actor-like ” judgments and are oriented toward concrete information , and interdependent partici- pants ( actors ) tend to make “ observer-like ” judgments and focus on abstract information .
Two major types of self-construal—independent and interdependent—have been well established in the litera- ture ( Markus and Kitayama 1991 ) .
People with an indepen- dent self-construal ( hereinafter , “ independents ” ) accentuate self-related features and minimize the influence of oth- ers in the self-schema ( Singelis 1994 ) .
Conversely , people with an interdependent self-construal ( hereinafter , “ inter- dependents ” ) think about themselves more often from a group perspective and value connections and integration with other people ( Singelis 1994 ) .
A consistent finding in the literature is that interdependents ( vs. independents ) , who value connections and integration with other peo- ple and place emphasis on social relationships , are more likely to engage in “ perspective taking ” ( e.g. , Wu and Keysar 2007 ) , in which they seek understanding from oth- ers ’ perspectives and respond to others ’ needs and expec- tations .
Indeed , Markus and Kitayama ( 1991 ) contend that people in interdependent cultures are predisposed to read others ’ minds during interpersonal interactions .
The aware- ness of other people ’ s needs and expectations persists and guides their judgments and behaviors even when these oth- ers have not explicitly stated their needs and expectations ( e.g. , Ambady et al .
1996 ) .
Accordingly , because perspec- tive taking enables interdependents to access different infor- mational cues than independents , interdependents should evaluate experience consumption differently .
The spectator role .
In contrast with independent specta- tors , who focus on abstract dispositional information , inter- dependent spectators , by taking the perspective of the target person , become more aware of the concrete , situational fac- tors that influence that person ’ s behaviors ( Church et al .
2003 ; Markus and Kitayama 1991 ) .
Motivated to ascertain the dynamic and intricate characteristics of other people whose needs and expectations vary across contexts , interde- pendent spectators are more likely to focus on concrete sit- uations when rendering judgments about others and social events , without abstracting traits or features from contexts ( Ng and Houston 2006 ) .
Empirical studies investigating the prevalence of the “ correspondence bias ” across indepen- dent and interdependent cultures support the position that interdependent observers are likely to make actor-like judg- ments that incorporate concrete , situational information .
From this literature , the tendency of observers to focus on abstract , dispositional information , an effect typically found in Western cultures in which people have a propensity for a chronic independent self-construal , dissipates among Easterners , who tend to have a chronic interdependent self- construal ( e.g. , Masuda and Kitayama 2004 ; Miyamoto and Kitayama 2002 ) .
Instead , Eastern observers are more likely to consider concrete , situational factors when rendering judgments about others .
The participant role .
By the same token , when inter- dependents are actors themselves , they are disposed to engage in perspective taking and render observer-like judg- ments .
Specifically , interdependents are likely to assess their own behaviors from the perspective of an observer .
As Cohen and Gunz ( 2002 , p. 55 ) propose , interdependent actors are likely to “ switch their perspective , shifting their attention to experiencing the self from an outsider ’ s per- spective or from the perspective of the generalized other. ” Process and Outcome in Experience Consumption 957 Furthermore , they find that interdependent actors are more likely to generate third-person ( observer ) memories about their own experiences while independent actors tend to have more first-person ( actor ) memories .
Because interde- pendent actors take the perspective of observers , they assess their own behaviors from a distance and switch the focus from concrete , situational factors to more abstract , disposi- tional information ( Pronin and Ross 2006 ) .
In summary , as a result of perspective taking , interdepen- dents are more attentive to different types of information than independents .
When assuming the role of a spectator , compared with independents , who are attentive to abstract , dispositional information , interdependents are more ori- ented toward concrete , situational factors .
In contrast , when assuming a participant role , compared with independents , who focus on concrete , situational factors , interdependents are more predisposed to abstract , dispositional informa- tion .
As a result , independent ( interdependent ) spectators ’ experience consumption evaluations are more likely to be enhanced by favorable experience outcomes ( processes ) , but independent ( interdependent ) participants ’ evaluations are likely to be more positive because of favorable experi- ence processes ( outcomes ) .
To examine the moderating factors of the importance of outcome and process on experience evaluations , we focus on the types of experience consumption in which the two evaluation antecedents are inconsistent with each other— the “ positive outcome ( but negative process ) ” experience and the “ positive process ( but negative outcome ) ” expe- rience ( for similar procedures , see Liberman and Trope 1998 ; Pham and Avnet 2004 ; Zhao , Hoeffler , and Zauber- man 2007 ) .
Examination of these experience types provides clear implications for marketers regarding which compo- nents of experiences ( process vs. outcome ) are crucial for enhancing consumer evaluations .
Our theorizing leads us to hypothesize a three-way interaction among self-construal , type of experience ( i.e. , whether the process or outcome is positive ) , and consumer role ( i.e. , participant vs. spectator ) on experience evaluations : H1 : An interaction among self-construal , type of experience , and consumption role will emerge for experience con- sumption evaluations .
H1a : In the spectator role , • Independents ( vs. interdependents ) will have higher eval- uations when the outcome is positive ( and the process is negative ) .
• Interdependents ( vs. independents ) will have higher eval- uations when the process is positive ( and the outcome is negative ) .
H1b : In the participant role , • Independents ( vs. interdependents ) will have higher eval- uations when the process is positive ( and the outcome is negative ) .
• Interdependents ( vs. independents ) will have higher eval- uations when the outcome is positive ( and the process is negative ) .
STUDY 1 The primary purpose of Study 1 was to provide evidence for H1 .
Respondents were asked to recall past experiences in which they assumed the role of either a participant or a spectator .
Guidelines for recall were provided so that the experiences featured either a positive outcome ( but a nega- tive process ) or a positive process ( but a negative outcome ) .
We identified respondents ’ self-construal through measure- ment scales ( Singelis 1994 ) .
In addition to collecting respondents ’ evaluations of the recalled experiences to test H1 , we collected their descriptions and thoughts about the experiences to pro- vide evidence for the mechanism underlying evaluation .
Our theorizing posits that the role respondents undertake ( participant vs. spectator ) and their self-construal will deter- mine the importance they attach to the process and out- come .
More specifically , when assuming the role of a spectator , independents ( vs. interdependents ) should place greater emphasis on the experience outcome , while interde- pendents ( vs. independents ) should emphasize the experi- ence process , regardless of whether the experience features a positive outcome or a positive process .
In contrast , when undertaking the role of a participant , regardless of the type of the experience , independents ( vs. interdepen- dents ) should focus more on the process , while interde- pendents ( vs. independents ) should emphasize the outcome .
Accordingly , we predict a two-way interaction between self-construal and consumer role ( spectator vs. participant ) on the proportion of outcome- and process-related thoughts respondents generate .
More specifically , in the specta- tor role , independents ( vs. interdependents ) will generate more thoughts related to the experience outcome but fewer thoughts pertaining to the experience process .
In contrast , in the participant role , independents ( vs. interdependents ) will generate more thoughts with respect to the experience process but fewer thoughts related to experience outcome .
Furthermore , our theorizing predicts that interdependents will be more likely to assume the perspective of others and engage in perspective taking than their independent counterparts ( e.g. , Wu and Keysar 2007 ) .
Interdependents ’ perspective taking leads them to make “ participant-like ” judgments when they are spectators by incorporating pro- cess information in their evaluations and “ spectator-like ” judgments when they are participants by concentrating on outcome information .
Interdependents ( vs. independents ) should engage more in perspective taking , regardless of the type of experience or consumer role .
Thus , we pre- dict a main effect of self-construal on the proportion of perspective-taking thoughts , such that interdependents will generate a greater proportion of perspective-taking thoughts than independents .
Design and Procedure Four hundred thirty-seven respondents participated in a 2 ( measured self-construal : independent vs. interdepen- dent ) × 2 ( type of experience : positive outcome , negative process vs. positive process , negative outcome ) × 2 ( con- sumer role : participant vs. spectator ) between-subjects full factorial design .
All respondents completed a questionnaire at their own pace and were instructed to think about a previous sports consumption experience .
We defined sports consumption as a sports match/game between two people or two teams .
In the participant condition , respondents were asked to recall a sports game in which they personally played .
Examples included playing a basketball game , play- ing in a tennis match , and playing cards .
In the spectator 958 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , DECEMBER 2012 condition , respondents were told to recall a game they per- sonally watched .
Examples included watching a basketball game , watching a tennis match , and watching a card game .
We manipulated type of experience by varying the guide- lines for the recall of the sporting event .
In the positive outcome , negative process condition ( hereinafter , the “ pos- itive outcome ” condition ) , respondents recalled and wrote down a sports consumption experience in which “ ( 1 ) you [ the person/team you support ] won the game , and ( 2 ) you were satisfied with the match results. ” At the same time , the event recalled should have a negative process : “ ( 1 ) the process in the game was frustrating or boring , and ( 2 ) you did not enjoy the process. ” In the negative outcome , pos- itive process condition ( hereinafter , the “ positive process ” condition ) , respondents recalled and wrote down an experi- ence in which “ ( 1 ) you [ the person/team you support ] lost the game , and ( 2 ) you were not satisfied with the match results. ” At the same time , “ ( 1 ) the process in the game was involving and exciting , and ( 2 ) you enjoyed the pro- cess. ” To ensure that our recall instructions did not have any unintended effect on other concepts , two independent coders ( r = 089 ) rated the nature of the recalled experi- ence ( ball-related/other ; amateur/professional ) .
No differ- ences emerged in the nature of the experience participants recalled across different conditions ( Fs < 1 ) .
After completing the recall task , respondents described in detail the thoughts they had about the sports con- sumption experience and reported their overall experience consumption evaluations , measured using three seven- point scales anchored by “ dissatisfied/satisfied , ” “ frustrated/ contented , ” and “ upset/delighted ” ( Spreng , MacKenzie , and Olshavsky 1996 ; Á = 088 ) .
Next , respondents completed manipulation check measures for both the experience out- come and process .
Respondents were asked to ignore the outcome ( process ) of the game and rate the process ( out- come ) using the same seven-point scales ( outcome : Á = 097 ; process : Á = 092 ) .
Subsequently , respondents completed two 12-item scales developed by Singelis ( 1994 ) that mea- sured their independent and interdependent self-construal .
We averaged the items on each scale to form an indepen- dence ( Á = 081 ) and an interdependence ( Á = 081 ) score .
According to Singelis ( 1994 ) , independent and interdepen- dent self-construals reflect different dimensions of the self and can coexist within individuals .
Following the procedure outlined in the literature ( e.g. , Escalas and Bettman 2005 ; Jain , Desai , and Mao 2007 ) , we included only respon- dents with a predominant independent or interdependent self in further analyses .
Accordingly , we classified respon- dents as independents ( interdependents ) whose indepen- dence ( interdependence ) score exceeded the 50th percentile and , at the same time , whose interdependence ( indepen- dence ) score fell below the 50th percentile .
With this crite- rion , 85 independents and 87 interdependents qualified for further analysis.1 1Following the procedure that Escalas and Bettman ( 2005 ) outline , we also analyzed the data by employing a continuous index of inde- pendence relative to interdependence : ( independent score− interdependent score ) / ( independent score+ interdependent score ) .
The regression analysis using the continuous index replicated the findings we report herein .
Results Manipulation checks .
As we expected , respondents assigned to the positive outcome ( vs. the positive pro- cess ) condition reported more positive perceptions of the outcome ( Mpositive outcome = 5005 vs. Mpositive process = 4041 ; F4111705 = 3080 , p < 005 ) but less positive perceptions of the process ( Mpositive outcome = 4075 vs. Mpositive process = 5033 ; F4111705 = 5092 , p < 002 ) .
Experience consumption evaluations .
We conducted a 2 ( self-construal ) × 2 ( type of experience ) × 2 ( consumer role ) analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) on overall experi- ence consumption evaluations .
As we anticipated , a sig- nificant three-way interaction emerged ( F4111645 = 19074 , p < 001 ; see Figure 1 ) .
For spectators , a significant two- way interaction occurred between self-construal and type of experience ( F4111645 = 10088 , p < 001 ) .
Follow-up con- trasts revealed that when the outcome was positive , inde- pendents ( vs. interdependents ) reported significantly higher evaluations ( Mindependents = 5042 vs. Minterdependents = 4040 ; F4111645 = 4065 , p < 003 ) .
In contrast , when the process was positive , interdependents ( vs. independents ) reported higher evaluations ( Mindependents = 4005 vs. Minterdependents = 5019 ; F4111645 = 6034 , p < 001 ) .
These results suggest that for independent ( interdependent ) spectators , a positive experience outcome ( process ) is more likely to enhance evaluations , in support of H1a .
For participants , a two-way interaction also occurred between self-construal and type of experience ( F4111645 = 8089 , p < 001 ) , but as we anticipated , the pattern was opposite that in the spectator conditions .
Planned con- trasts showed that when the outcome was positive , inter- dependents ( vs. independents ) reported higher evaluations ( Mindependents = 4063 vs. Minterdependents = 5055 ; F4111645 = 4024 , p < 004 ) .
When the process was positive , indepen- dents ( vs. interdependents ) reported higher evaluations ( Mindependents = 5044 vs. Minterdependents = 4047 ; F4111645 = 4065 , p < 003 ) .
The contrasts show that a positive experience process ( outcome ) enhances independent ( interdependent ) participants ’ evaluations , in support of H1b .
Experience thoughts .
To examine the cognition underly- ing evaluations , we examined respondents ’ thoughts about their experience .
Two judges who were blind to the treat- ments classified respondents ’ thoughts reliably into several categories ( interjudge correlation : r = 087 ; differences were resolved through discussion ) .
First , the judges grouped thoughts according to whether their content was related to the experience process ( i.e. , how the game unfolded and progressed ; e.g. , “ The game was intense and nail- biting ” ) or outcome ( i.e. , gains or losses as a result of the game ; e.g. , “ My team lost by a few points ” ) .
Sec- ond , the judges classified thoughts according to whether they reflected perspective taking ( i.e. , whether respondents displayed thoughts from the perspectives of other people ) .
Perspective-taking thoughts included “ I can relate to the player ” and “ I can imagine how disappointed the other team must have been. ” We analyzed outcome-related , process- related , and perspective-taking thoughts as a proportion of total thoughts .
We performed the same three-way ANOVA used previously on these measures .
First , we examined respondents ’ proportion of outcome- and process-related thoughts .
The anticipated two-way interaction ( self-construal× consumer role ) was significant Process and Outcome in Experience Consumption 959 Figure 1 STUDY 1 : EXPERIENCE EVALUATIONS AS A FUNCTION OF SELF-CONSTRUAL , TYPE OF EXPERIENCE , AND CONSUMER ROLE A : Spectator 4.63 5.44 5.55 4.47 3 4 5 6 Positive Outcome ( Negative Process ) Positive Process ( Negative Outcome ) E xp er ie n ce E va lu at io n s Independent Interdependent 5.42 4.05 4.40 5.19 3 4 5 6 Positive Outcome ( Negative Process ) Positive Process ( Negative Outcome ) E xp er ie n ce E va lu at io n s Independent Interdependent B : Participant for both outcome-related thoughts ( F4111645 = 20062 , p < 001 ) and process-related thoughts ( F4111645 = 13077 , p < 001 ) .
No other effects emerged ( Fs < 1 ) .
Follow- up contrasts revealed that when in a spectator role , independents ( vs. interdependents ) generated a greater proportion of outcome-related thoughts ( Mindependents = 038 vs. Minterdependents = 027 ; F4111645 = 11030 , p < 001 ) and a smaller proportion of process-related thoughts ( Mindependents = 023 vs. Minterdependents = 037 ; F4111645 = 8093 , p < 001 ) .
The opposite occurred when respondents assumed the role of a participant .
In the participant case , inde- pendents ( vs. interdependents ) generated a smaller pro- portion of outcome-related thoughts ( Mindependents = 028 vs. Minterdependents = 037 ; F4111645 = 9000 , p < 001 ) and a greater proportion of process-related thoughts ( Mindependents = 036 vs. Minterdependents = 027 ; F4111645 = 4077 , p < 003 ) .
These results provide further evidence that consumers ’ focus on either outcome or process in evaluating experience consumption , as determined by both their self-construal and their role in the experience .
Second , we examined respondents ’ perspective-taking thoughts .
As we anticipated , interdependents reported a greater proportion of perspective-taking thoughts than independents ( Mindependents = 006 vs. Minterdependents = 021 ; F4111645 = 11086 , p < 001 ) .
No other effects were signifi- cant for this measure ( Fs < 1 ) .
Thus , consistent with our the- orizing , interdependents ( vs. independents ) engaged more in perspective taking , regardless of the type of experience or their role in the experience .
Discussion .
Using recall of actual consumption experi- ences and measuring respondents ’ self-construal , Study 1 revealed a three-way interaction among self-construal , type of experience , and consumer role , providing support for H1 .
Furthermore , the analysis of thought content offered sup- port for our theorizing .
Taken together , these results illus- trate the factors that influence the importance of outcome and process in experience consumption evaluations and provide preliminary evidence for the proposed mechanism underlying these evaluations .
STUDY 2 The major goal of Study 2 was to find further empir- ical support for our theorizing and bolster the ecological validity of our results by engaging respondents in an actual experience : We asked respondents either to perform in a singing competition ( participant condition ) or to watch a performance of a singing competition ( spectator condition ) .
In addition , Study 2 employed an alternative manipulation of type of experience : After engaging in the singing com- petition experience , respondents elaborated on the differ- ent aspects of the experience to accentuate the salience of either a positive outcome ( but a negative process ) or a pos- itive process ( but a negative outcome ) .
Finally , Study 2 employed a different operationalization of self-construal ( i.e. , a situational manipulation ) .
Prior research suggests that the self is malleable and thus can be operationalized as an individual difference variable or a situationally activated state ( e.g. , Ahluwalia 2008 ) .
Design and Procedure One hundred eleven respondents participated in a 2 ( self-construal : independent vs. interdependent ) × 2 ( type of experience : positive outcome , negative process vs. posi- tive process , negative outcome ) ×2 ( consumer role : partic- ipant vs. spectator ) between-subjects full factorial design .
As an overview , after exposure to the self-construal manip- ulation task , respondents engaged in a singing competi- tion experience either as a participant or a spectator .
After that , we manipulated type of experience and measured the dependent variables .
We conducted the experiment individually with each respondent .
On arrival , respondents were first exposed to the self-construal manipulation , which was disguised as a purportedly unrelated “ proofreading ” study ( Agrawal and Maheswaran 2005 ; Kühnen , Hannover , and Schubert 2001 ) .
Specifically , respondents were told to read a short para- graph about “ a trip to the city ” and circle the pronouns in the text .
The text was the same across the two conditions with the exception that the 15 pronouns in the text were either independent ( I , me , my , and myself ) or interdepen- dent ( we , us , our , and ourselves ) .
We conducted a pretest to examine whether this manipulation elicited different types of self-construal , as intended .
Forty-one respondents were first exposed to the self-construal manipulation and then completed ten statements beginning with “ I am _____ ” 960 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , DECEMBER 2012 ( ten-statement task ; Agrawal and Maheswaran 2005 ) .
With Agrawal and Maheswaran ’ s ( 2005 ) classification schemes , two independent coders rated the statements as reflecting an independent or an interdependent self-construal ( inter- judge correlation : r = 085 ; differences were resolved through discussion ) .
Independent statements described a personal attribute , attitude , or ability ( e.g. , “ I am tall ” ) .
Interdepen- dent statements described a relationship with others ( e.g. , “ I am a son ” ) or a group membership ( “ I am a student ” ) .
Unrelated statements ( e.g. , “ I am going out for lunch after this ” ) were excluded from analyses .
We performed one-way ANOVAs with self-construal as the independent variable on the number of independent and interdependent statements .
The results confirmed the success of our manipulation : Respondents in the independent ( vs. interdependent ) self- construal condition generated more self-focused statements ( Mindependents = 4023 vs. Minterdependents = 2063 ; F411395 = 7065 , p < 001 ) and fewer other-focused statements ( Mindependents = 2082 vs. Minterdependents = 4011 ; F411395 = 6079 , p < 001 ) .
After they completed the self-construal manipulation , respondents were invited to perform as a contestant ( partici- pant condition ) or watch a contestant performing ( spectator condition ) in the preliminary round of a singing compe- tition .
Respondents were informed that contestants whose performance was favorably judged would proceed to the next round of the competition .
In the participant condition , with a microphone attached to a computer , respondents were asked to sing a song of their choice for approxi- mately 30 seconds .
Respondents were told that a program installed on the computer would analyze their performance and provide instant feedback afterward .
In the spectator condition , respondents were instructed to watch , on a com- puter , a video taken from a preliminary round of American Idol , in which a contestant sang a song of his or her choice for approximately 30 seconds .
To control for the effect of the contestant ’ s gender , we randomly assigned respondents in the spectator condition to watch a performance of either a male or a female contestant .
After singing ( participant condition ) or watching a video of singing ( spectator condi- tion ) , respondents viewed a short video in which the three American Idol judges gave feedback on the singing perfor- mance .
The feedback video was identical across the par- ticipant and spectator conditions and the male and female contestants .
Unlike Study 1 , in which respondents evaluated differ- ent experiences ( experiences with a positive outcome vs. a positive process ) , we designed Study 2 in such a way that respondents engaged in the same experience , of which the process and outcome entailed both positive and negative aspects ( which enabled us to manipulate perceptions of the type of experience , as we describe subsequently ) .
To ensure that the experience outcome was potentially ambiguous , we edited and compiled a feedback video that featured the American Idol judges delivering a mix of positive ( e.g. , “ Great voice .
I like everything about you ” ) and negative ( e.g. , “ I was not impressed with your performance ” ) feed- back on the singing performance .
In addition , we designed the experience process to be potentially ambiguous .
On the one hand , we tried to ensure that the instructions for the experience were easy to follow and that respondents could participate in the activity in a quiet and private environ- ment , which contributes favorably to the experience pro- cess .
On the other hand , the somewhat unorganized set- ting in the lab and the average quality of the computer ’ s sound system could induce less favorable perceptions of the experience process .
We conducted a pretest to confirm that the experience would indeed elicit mixed perceptions of the outcome and process in both the participant and the spectator conditions .
In addition , we included confounding checks to ensure that our manipulation of consumer role did not unintentionally affect other variables .
Thirty respondents engaged in the same participant or spectator experience as in the main study and described their perceptions of the experience process and outcome .
Next , they completed several con- founding checks using seven-point scales : involvement in the experience ( e.g. , “ I felt motivated during the experi- ence ” ) ; perceived realism of the experience ( e.g. , “ I found the experience realistic ” ) ; and perceived favorability of the outcome , the process , and the overall experience ( using the same items as in Study 1 ) .
Our analysis showed that across the participant and spectator conditions , respondents generated an equivalent number of positive and negative associations for both process and outcome ( Fs < 1 ) , con- firming that the experience indeed induced positive and negative perceptions .
In addition , ANOVAs performed on the potential confounding variables revealed that the spec- tator and participant conditions evoked a comparable level of involvement ( Mparticipant = 5031 vs. Mspectator = 5003 ) , real- ism ( Mparticipant = 4046 vs. Mspectator = 4044 ) , favorability of the process ( Mparticipant = 5003 vs. Mspectator = 5016 ) , outcome ( Mparticipant = 5019 vs. Mspectator = 5009 ) , and overall experi- ence ( Mparticipant = 4089 vs. Mspectator = 5022 ) ( all Fs < 1 ) .
After the singing competition experience , respondents completed a booklet at their own pace , which consisted of the manipulation of type of experience , followed by an assessment of respondents ’ evaluations of the experience .
To manipulate type of experience , we instructed respon- dents to describe the singing competition experience in which they had taken part .
Guidelines for the descriptions varied to accentuate the positive outcome ( and negative process ) or the positive process ( and negative outcome ) of the experience .
In the positive outcome condition , respon- dents were asked to describe both negative aspects of the process ( e.g. , the somewhat unorganized setting ) and posi- tive aspects of the outcome ( e.g. , likely to qualify for next round ) .
In the positive process condition , respondents were instructed to elaborate on both positive aspects of the pro- cess ( e.g. , a private environment ) and negative aspects of the outcome ( e.g. , may not proceed to the next round ) .
Using the same checks as in Study 1 ( outcome : Á = 078 ; process : Á = 075 ) , a pretest ( n = 60 ) confirmed that our manipulation of type of experience was successful .
Specif- ically , respondents in the positive outcome ( vs. positive process ) condition reported more positive perceptions of the outcome ( Mpositive outcome = 5020 vs. Mpositive process = 4061 ; F411565 = 6022 , p < 002 ) but less positive perceptions of the process ( Mpositive outcome = 4078 vs. Mpositive process = 5025 ; F411565 = 4009 , p < 005 ) .
Moreover , to provide a manipula- tion check for consumer role , we asked respondents to indi- cate their level of agreement on a four-item scale ( e.g. , “ I am a spectator of the game , ” “ I am a participant of the game ( reverse coded ) ” ; 1 = “ strongly disagree , ” and 7 = “ strongly agree ” ; Á = 088 ) .
We averaged the items to form an index of consumer role , with higher ( lower ) scores indicating a spectator ( participant ) role .
Respondents in the spectator Process and Outcome in Experience Consumption 961 ( vs. participant ) condition confirmed their role as a specta- tor ( Mparticipant = 2013 vs. Mspectator = 5098 ; F411565 = 252027 , p < 0001 ) .
After completing the manipulation of type of experience , respondents provided their overall evaluations of the expe- rience using the same scale employed in Study 1 ( Á = 077 ) .
Finally , respondents were thanked and debriefed .
Results Experience consumption evaluations .
We performed a 2 ( self-construal ) × 2 ( type of experience ) × 2 ( consumer role ) ANOVA on respondents ’ experience consumption evaluations .
Consistent with the findings in Study 1 , a significant three-way interaction emerged ( F4111035 = 18063 , p < 001 ; see Figure 2 ) .
For spectators , a signifi- cant two-way interaction occurred between self-construal and type of experience ( F4111035 = 8032 , p < 001 ) .
Follow- up contrasts revealed that when the positive outcome was made salient , independents ( vs. interdependents ) reported significantly higher evaluations of the singing competi- tion experience ( Mindependents = 4069 vs. Minterdependents = 4000 ; F4111035 = 4018 , p < 004 ) .
In contrast , when the posi- tive process was salient , interdependents ( vs. indepen- dents ) reported higher evaluations ( Mindependents = 4049 vs. Minterdependents = 5022 ; F4111035 = 4005 , p < 004 ) .
For par- ticipants , a significant two-way interaction also occurred between self-construal and type of experience ( F4111035 = 10030 , p < 001 ) .
Planned contrasts revealed that when the positive outcome was salient , interdependents ( vs. inde- pendents ) reported higher evaluations of the experience ( Mindependents = 4018 vs. Minterdependents = 5005 ; F4111035 = 5046 , p < 002 ) .
However , when the positive process was salient , independents ( vs. interdependents ) reported higher evaluations ( Mindependents = 5025 vs. Minterdependents = 4041 ; F4111035 = 4086 , p < 003 ) .
Discussion .
The findings of Study 2 augment the robust- ness of our theorizing by engaging respondents in an actual experience ( a singing competition ) and by employ- ing an alternative operationalization of self-construal and type of experience .
Converging evidence for our theorizing emerged across both Studies 1 and 2 .
Study 3 addresses several important questions .
Our the- orizing contends that perspective taking is a crucial psy- chological process that accounts for why interdependents differ from independents in experience consumption eval- uations .
Although the thought-content analysis in Study 1 provided preliminary support for the perspective-taking account , Study 3 seeks additional evidence for this psycho- logical mechanism .
Specifically , Study 3 examines whether inhibiting perspective-taking tendency—that is , encourag- ing people to keep their own perspectives rather than con- sidering someone else ’ s—leads interdependents to evaluate experience consumption in the same manner as indepen- dents .
According to our theorizing , when perspective tak- ing is suppressed , regardless of consumers ’ self-construal , spectators ( vs. participants ) should favor an experience with a positive outcome , while participants ( vs. specta- tors ) should evaluate an experience with a positive process more favorably .
Furthermore , in Study 2 we manipulated outcome and process by altering respondents ’ perceptions .
To extend the robustness of our findings , Study 3 manipulated actual experience .
Thus , respondents engaged in experiences that differed in terms of outcome and process .
Figure 2 STUDY 2 : EXPERIENCE EVALUTIONS AS A FUNCTION OF SELF-CONSTRUAL , TYPE OF EXPERIENCE , AND CONSUMER ROLE A : Spectator 4.18 5.25 5.05 4.41 3 4 5 6 Positive Outcome ( Negative Process ) Positive Process ( Negative Outcome ) E xp er ie n ce E va lu at io n s Independent Interdependent 4.69 4.49 4.00 5.22 3 4 5 6 Positive Outcome ( Negative Process ) Positive Process ( Negative Outcome ) E xp er ie n ce E va lu at io n s Independent Interdependent B : Participant STUDY 3 Study 3 manipulated the key psychological mechanism , perspective taking .
In the control condition , in which per- spective taking is not suppressed and respondents act on their own propensity to take the perspective of another ( similar to Studies 1 and 2 ) , respondents ’ experience eval- uations should replicate our previous results .
That is , inde- pendent ( vs. interdependent ) spectators should generate more favorable evaluations of an experience with a positive outcome ( vs. process ) , and independent ( vs. interdepen- dent ) participants should offer more favorable evaluations of an experience with a positive process ( vs. outcome ) .
Conversely , in conditions in which perspective taking is suppressed , by priming respondents to maintain their own perspectives , interdependents should evaluate the experi- ences in the same way as independents .
Thus : H2 : An interaction among self-construal , type of experience , consumption role , and perspective taking will emerge for experience consumption evaluations .
H2a : In the absence of perspective-taking suppression primes ( the control condition ) , the same interaction among self- construal , type of experience , and consumer role as in Studies 1 and 2 will be replicated .
962 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , DECEMBER 2012 H2b : When respondents ’ perspective-taking tendency is sup- pressed , an interaction between consumer role and type of experience will occur .
Specifically , • In an experience with a positive outcome ( and a negative process ) , spectators ( vs. participants ) will have higher evaluations .
• In an experience with a positive process ( and a negative outcome ) , participants ( vs. spectators ) will have higher evaluations .
Design and Procedure Two hundred thirty respondents participated in a 2 ( self- construal : independent vs. interdependent ) × 2 ( type of experience : positive outcome , negative process vs. posi- tive process , negative outcome ) ×2 ( consumer role : partic- ipant vs. spectator ) ×2 ( perspective taking : suppressed vs. control ) between-subjects full factorial design .
On arrival , respondents were first exposed to the same self-construal manipulation as in Study 2 .
Next , to manipulate perspec- tive taking , we asked respondents to recall and describe two consumption experiences .
To suppress perspective tak- ing , we asked half the respondents to recall and briefly describe two experiences in which they stuck with their own perspectives ( e.g. , making a decision without consid- ering other people ’ s perspectives ) .
In the control condition , the other half recalled two experiences that happened in the past .
A pretest ( n = 33 ) confirmed that our manipula- tion of perspective taking was successful , using two seven- point scales ( e.g. , “ I tried to look from others ’ perspective ” ; r = 052 , p < 001 ) .
Respondents in the perspective-taking sup- pression condition were less likely to take the perspectives of others ( Msuppression = 3000 vs. Mcontrol = 4067 ; F411315 = 4093 , p < 003 ) .
Next , respondents took part in a singing competition experience similar to Study 2 , in which they either per- formed as a contestant in a singing competition or watched a video of a contestant performing .
In this study , the actual outcome and process of the singing competition experience were manipulated .
Respondents in the positive outcome condition took part in a singing competition experience in which the process was negative and the outcome was favor- able .
To manipulate the unfavorable process , respondents heard a preprogrammed beep every five seconds while singing ( or watching the contestant ) .
In addition , the lab room appeared in a disorganized and untidy state , with unfinished food and scraps of paper scattered across the room .
To highlight the positive outcome , after they fin- ished singing ( or watching the video ) , respondents watched a feedback video that featured the American Idol judges delivering positive comments about them ( or the contestant they watched ) ( e.g. , “ Great voice .
I like everything about you ” ) .
They were informed that they themselves ( or the contestant they watched ) qualified for the next round of the singing competition .
In contrast , respondents in the positive process condition took part in a singing competition experience , which fea- tured a favorable process but a negative outcome .
To manip- ulate the positive process , respondents sang ( or watched the contestant sing ) in a quiet environment , without beeping .
In addition , the lab room appeared in an organized and tidy state , with no unfinished food or scraps of paper .
To high- light the negative outcome , after they finished singing ( or watching the video ) , respondents watched a feedback video that featured the American Idol judges delivering negative comments about them ( or the contestant they watched ) ( e.g. , “ I was not impressed with your perfor- mance ” ) , and they were ( or the contestant they watched was ) eliminated and disqualified for the next round of the singing competition .
We conducted a pretest ( 2 [ type of experience : positive outcome vs. positive process ] ×2 [ consumer role : spectator vs. participant ] ) to provide evidence for our manipulations and to ensure that our manipulations did not unintentionally affect other variables .
Eighty-three respondents engaged in the same experience as in the main study and com- pleted the manipulation check measures of type of expe- rience and consumer role , using the same scales as in Study 2 ( outcome : Á = 095 ; process : Á = 091 ; consumer role : Á = 092 ) .
In addition to the confounding variables exam- ined in Study 2 ( involvement , realism of the experience ) , we measured respondents ’ mood using the PANAS ( Posi- tive Affect , Negative Affect Schedule ; Waston , Clark , and Tellegen 1988 ) .
The ANOVAs performed on confounding checks showed that our manipulations did not inadvertently affect the potential confounding variables ( all Fs < 1 ) .
The results on manipulation checks also revealed support for our manipulations .
Specifically , respondents in the positive outcome ( vs. positive process ) condition reported more pos- itive perceptions of the outcome ( Mpositive outcome = 5013 vs. Mpositive process = 4038 ; F411795 = 4071 , p < 003 ) but less pos- itive perceptions of the process ( Mpositive outcome = 4051 vs. Mpositive process = 5021 ; F411795 = 6080 , p < 001 ) .
In addition , those in the spectator ( vs. participant ) condition confirmed their role as a spectator ( Mparticipant = 2015 vs. Mspectator = 6036 ; F411795 = 279083 , p < 0001 ; higher scores indicated a spectator role ) .
After the singing competition experience , respondents completed a booklet at their own pace and evaluated the singing competition experience using the same scales employed in the previous studies ( Á = 090 ) .
Respon- dents assigned to the participation condition also indi- cated whether they indeed sang.2 Finally , respondents were thanked and debriefed .
Results Experience consumption evaluations .
We conducted a 2 ( self-construal ) × 2 ( type of experience ) × 2 ( consumer role ) × 2 ( perspective taking : suppressed vs. control ) ANOVA on respondents ’ experience consumption eval- uations .
We anticipate that in the control condition , in which perspective taking is not suppressed , the results will replicate the previous findings .
Conversely , when perspec- tive taking is suppressed , interdependents should evalu- ate the experience in the same way as the independents .
As we expected , a significant four-way interaction of the independent variables emerged ( F4112045 = 10017 , p < 001 ; see Figure 3 ) .
We conducted follow-up analyses to understand this interaction .
As we hypothesized , in the control condi- tion , the findings in Studies 1 and 2 were replicated , and the same three-way interaction among self-construal , type 2Ten respondents reported that they did not sing during the experiment , so we excluded their data from the analysis ( including these data did not change the results ) .
Process and Outcome in Experience Consumption 963 Figure 3 STUDY 3 : EXPERIENCE EVALUTIONS AS A FUNCTION OF SELF-CONSTRUAL , TYPE OF EXPERIENCE , CONSUMER ROLE , AND PERSPECTIVE TAKING A : Control : Spectator B : Control : Participant 5.18 4.13 4.23 5.08 3 4 5 6 Positive Outcome ( Negative Process ) Positive Process ( Negative Outcome ) E xp er ie n ce E va lu at io n s 4.97 4.16 4.94 4.00 3 4 5 6 Positive Outcome ( Negative Process ) Positive Process ( Negative Outcome ) E xp er ie n ce E va lu at io n s 4.07 5.06 4.09 5.16 3 4 5 6 Positive Outcome ( Negative Process ) Positive Process ( Negative Outcome ) E xp er ie n ce E va lu at io n s C : Perspective Taking Suppressed : Spectator D : Perspective Taking Suppressed : Participant 4.12 5.10 5.29 4.24 3 4 5 6 Positive Outcome ( Negative Process ) Positive Process ( Negative Outcome ) E xp er ie n ce E va lu at io n s Independent Interdependent Independent Interdependent Independent Interdependent Independent Interdependent of experience , and consumer role emerged ( F4112045 = 19037 , p < 001 ) .
For spectators , a significant two-way interaction between self-construal and type of experience emerged ( F4112045 = 9057 , p < 001 ) .
Follow-up contrasts revealed that when the experience featured a posi- tive outcome , independents ( vs. interdependents ) reported significantly higher evaluations ( Mindependents = 5018 vs. Minterdependents = 4023 ; F4112045 = 4042 , p < 004 ) .
In con- trast , when the experience had a positive process , inter- dependents ( vs. independents ) reported higher evaluations ( Mindependents = 4013 vs. Minterdependents = 5008 ; F4112045 = 5020 , p < 002 ) .
For participants , a significant two-way inter- action between self-construal and type of experience also occurred ( F4112045 = 9046 , p < 001 ) .
Planned contrasts revealed that when the experience featured a positive out- come , interdependents ( vs. independents ) reported higher evaluations ( Mindependents = 4012 vs. Minterdependents = 5029 ; F4112045 = 5091 , p < 002 ) .
However , when the experience had a positive process , independents ( vs. interdependents ) reported marginally higher evaluations ( Mindependents = 5010 vs. Minterdependents = 4024 ; F4112045 = 3063 , p < 006 ) .
Thus , the results support H2a .
In contrast , when respondents ’ perspective-taking ten- dency was suppressed , a two-way interaction between consumer role and type of experience emerged ( F4112045 = 16070 , p < 001 ) .
The results revealed that interdependents and independents evaluated the experience in the same way .
Planned contrasts showed that in the positive outcome condition , spectators reported more favorable evaluations of the experience than participants ( Mspectators = 4096 vs. Mparticipants = 4008 ; F4112045 = 6045 , p < 002 ) .
The opposite occurred in the positive process condition , such that partic- ipants evaluated the experience more positively than spec- tators ( Mspectators = 4008 vs. Mparticipants = 5012 ; F4112045 = 10076 , p < 001 ) .
Thus , the results also support H2b .
Discussion .
Study 3 offers strong empirical support for the mechanism posited to underlie the evaluation effects : perspective taking .
Importantly , when perspective taking was suppressed , interdependents evaluated the experience in the same way as independents .
In addition , in the control condition , we provide converging evidence for the three- way interaction among self-construal , type of experience , and consumer role by varying the outcome and process of an actual experience .
GENERAL DISCUSSION Findings and Contributions The empirical results across three studies reveal that when people evaluate experience consumption , the impor- 964 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , DECEMBER 2012 tance of process and outcome depends on two factors : con- sumers ’ role in the experience and self-construal .
When assuming the role of a spectator , independents ( vs. inter- dependents ) rely more on outcome while interdependents ( vs. independents ) focus on process in experience consump- tion evaluations .
Conversely , when undertaking the role of a participant , independents ( vs. interdependents ) focus more on process while interdependents ( vs. independents ) rely more on outcome .
This research contributes to the marketing literature in various ways .
First , this work delineates the conditions under which the process , along with the outcome , plays a significant role in determining experience consumption evaluations .
Second , this research elucidates the under- lying mechanism for the identified effects .
Independents ( vs. interdependents ) focus more on abstract information when they are spectators and evaluate experiences more on the consumption outcome , while interdependent spec- tators , who take the perspective of participants , base their evaluation more on the consumption process .
Conversely , independent ( vs. interdependent ) participants rely more on process in their evaluations , while interdependent ( vs. inde- pendent ) participants , taking the perspective of spectators , rely more on outcome .
Finally , this research extends the actor–observer litera- ture .
The results suggest that self-construal moderates the actor–observer paradigm .
We find that independents behave consistently with the actor–observer paradigm and consider the concrete , contextual information of experience con- sumption when they are actors but not observers .
However , the findings for interdependents reveal a different pattern .
Interdependents tune in to others ’ opinions and , as a result , make relatively more actor-like judgments when they are observers and more observer-like judgments when they are actors .
That is , interdependents ( vs. independents ) are more ( less ) likely to consider concrete , contextual information when they are observers ( actors ) .
Managerial Implications An increasing number of consumers are pursuing expe- riential activities ( e.g. , using social networks , practicing yoga at a gym , going to theme parks ) .
Many experience consumption activities contain both process and outcome components .
For example , in social networking , the process aspect might include whether the website provides tools for consumers to interact with their friends ( e.g. , forums , picto- rial editing tools , templates ) , whether surfing on the website is smooth and effortless , and so forth ; the outcome aspect might entail things such as whether consumers are able to keep connected with their friends and make new friends .
Our research has significant , practical implications because it offers insights into how managers can optimally allocate resources to areas that maximally enhance expe- rience consumption evaluations .
Our findings suggest that depending on the consumer segments targeted ( i.e. , inde- pendents or interdependents ) and the type of consumer experience offered ( i.e. , whether consumers assume the role of spectators or participants in the experience ) , companies can reap greater benefits by focusing on enhancing the process or the outcome of the experience .
Extant research suggests that marketers can employ self-construal as an effective way to segment consumers ( e.g. , Ahluwalia 2008 ) .
For example , consumers in North America ( vs. East Asia ) , male ( vs. female ) consumers , and European American ( vs. Asian and Hispanic American ) consumers are likely to possess an independent ( vs. interdependent ) self-construal ( e.g. , Ahluwalia 2008 ; Cross , Morris , and Gore 2002 ) .
Our research suggests that marketing efforts targeting indepen- dent ( interdependent ) consumers will be more effective if marketers allocate resources to the process ( outcome ) of the experience when these consumers are participants ; in con- trast , if consumers are spectators , efforts enhancing the outcome ( process ) will be more effective for independent ( interdependent ) consumers .
In addition to enhancing the process ( e.g. , providing necessary tools for consumers to achieve a positive out- come , making a game more entertaining ) and the out- come ( e.g. , gratifying consumers ’ desires and expectations ) directly , Study 2 sheds light on how marketers can influ- ence consumers ’ evaluations of experience consumption activities , for which consumers ’ perceptions of the process or outcome may be ambiguous .
We show that making cer- tain aspects of the experience salient in consumers ’ minds can lead them to perceive and evaluate the experience differently .
Therefore , in addition to allocating resources to improve the process versus outcome , marketers could enhance evaluations by encouraging consumers to focus on positive aspects of the outcome or process , whichever is more relevant to the overall experience .
Future Research Directions Further research should investigate factors that might have an impact on our results .
For example , Ahluwalia ( 2008 ) shows that information-processing differences between interdependents and independents are more promi- nent when consumers engage in extensive elaboration .
Thus , research could examine whether our results , obtained in a setting in which respondents likely had moderately high motivation , are mitigated when motivation is low .
In addition , we focus on experience consumption evalua- tions , and thus further research could examine whether our results generalize to more traditional types of consumption ( e.g. , toothpaste ) .
Another point that warrants further inves- tigation is whether perceptions of outcome and process affect each other for some experience consumption activ- ities .
For example , consumers may find the experience process more enjoyable when the outcome is desirable .
In this work , as we manipulated process and outcome , respondents ’ perceptions of these two experience compo- nents were less likely to influence each other .
Thus , further research could examine consumption situations in which perceptions of process and outcome might be intertwined .
REFERENCES Agrawal , Nidhi and Durairaj Maheswaran ( 2005 ) , “ The Effects of Self-Construal and Commitment on Persuasion , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 31 ( 4 ) , 841–49 .
and Echo Wen Wan ( 2009 ) , “ Regulating Risk or Risking Regulation ?
Construal Levels and Depletion Effects in the Pro- cessing of Health Messages , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 36 ( 3 ) , 448–62 .
Ahluwalia , Rohini ( 2008 ) , “ How Far Can a Brand Stretch ?
Under- standing the Role of Self-Construal , ” Journal of Marketing Research , 45 ( June ) , 337–50 .
Process and Outcome in Experience Consumption 965 Ambady , Nalini , Jasook Koo , Fiona Lee , and Robert Rosen- thal ( 1996 ) , “ More Than Words : Linguistic and Nonlinguistic Politeness in Two Cultures , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 70 ( 5 ) , 996–1011 .
Bar-Anan , Yoav , Nira Liberman , and Yaacov Trope ( 2006 ) , “ The Association Between Psychological Distance and Construal Level : Evidence from an Implicit Association Test , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 135 ( 4 ) , 609–622 .
Cave , Damien ( 2010 ) , “ In Recession , Americans Doing More , Buying Less , ” The New York Times , ( January 2 ) , [ avail- able at http : //www.nytimes.com/2010/01/03/business/economy/ 03experience.html ? pagewanted=all ] .
Church , Timothy A. , Fernando A. Ortiz , Marcia S. Katigbak , Tatyana V. Avdeyeva , Alice M. Emerson , José de Jesús Vargas Flores , and Joselina Ibáñez Reyes ( 2003 ) , “ Measuring Individ- ual and Cultural Differences in Implicit Trait Theories , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 85 ( 2 ) , 332–47 .
Cohen , Dov and Alex Gunz ( 2002 ) , “ As Seen by the Other 0 0 0 : Perspectives on the Self in the Memories and Emotional Per- ceptions of Easterners and Westerners , ” Psychological Science , 13 ( 1 ) , 55–59 .
Cross , Susan E. , Michael L. Morris , and Jonathan S. Gore ( 2002 ) , “ Thinking About Oneself and Others : The Relational- Interdependent Self-Construal and Social Cognition , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 82 ( 3 ) , 399–418 .
Csikszentmihalyi , Mihaly ( 1975 ) , Beyond Boredom and Anxiety .
San Francisco : Jossey-Bass .
Deci , Edward L. and Richard Ryan ( 2000 ) , “ The ‘ What ’ and ‘ Why ’ of Goal Pursuits : Human Needs and the Self- Determination of Behavior , ” Psychological Inquiry , 11 ( 4 ) , 227–68 .
Department of Labor ( 2011 ) , “ American Time Use Survey ( ATUS ) , ” Bureau of Labor Statistics , United States Department of Labor [ available at http : //www.bls.gov/news.release/atus .nr0.htm ] .
Escalas , Jennifer E. and James R. Bettman ( 2005 ) , “ Self- Construal , Reference Groups , and Brand Meaning , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 32 ( December ) , 378–89 .
Etgar , Michael ( 2008 ) , “ A Descriptive Model of the Consumer Co-Production Process , ” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 36 ( 1 ) , 97–108 .
Fiedler , Klaus , Guin R. Semin , Catrin Finkenauer , and Ingnd Berkel ( 1995 ) , “ Actor-Observer Bias in Close Relationships : The Role of Self-Knowledge and Self-Related Language , ” Per- sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 21 ( 5 ) , 525–38 .
Florida , Richard ( 2009 ) , “ The New Normal ? ” ( May 6 ) , ( accessed July 12 , 2012 ) , [ available at http : //www.creativeclass.com/ creative_class/2009/05/06/the-new-normal ] .
Gilbert , Daniel T. and Patrick S. Malone ( 1995 ) , “ The Correspon- dence Bias , ” Psychological Bulletin , 117 ( 1 ) , 21–38 .
Gilmore , James H. and B. Joseph Pine ( 2007 ) , Authenticity : What Consumers Really Want .
Boston : Harvard Business School Press .
Jain , Shailendra Pratap , Kalpesh Kaushik Desai , and Huifang Mao ( 2007 ) , “ The Influence of Chronic and Situational Self- Construal on Categorization , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 34 ( 1 ) , 66–76 .
Jones , Edward E. ( 1979 ) , “ The Rocky Road from Acts to Dispo- sitions , ” American Psychologist , 34 ( 2 ) , 107–117 .
and Victor A. Harris ( 1967 ) , “ The Attribution of Atti- tudes , ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 3 ( 1 ) , 1–24 .
and Richard E. Nisbett ( 1972 ) , “ The Actor and the Observer : Divergent Perceptions of the Cause of Behavior , ” in Attribution : Perceiving the Causes of Behavior , Edward E. Jones , David E. Kanouse , Harold H. Kelley , Richard E. Nisbett , Stuart S. Valins , and Bernard Weiner , eds .
Morristown , NJ : General Learning , 79–94 .
Kelley , Harold H. and John L. Michela ( 1980 ) , “ Attribution The- ory and Research , ” Annual Review of Psychology , 31 , 457–501 .
Kühnen , Ulrich , Bettina Hannover , and Benjamin Schubert ( 2001 ) , “ The Semantic-Procedural Interface Model of the Self , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 80 ( 3 ) , 397–409 .
Liberman , Nira and Yaacov Trope ( 1998 ) , “ The Role of Feasibil- ity and Desirability Considerations in Near and Distant Future Decisions : A Test of Temporal Construal Theory , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 75 ( July ) , 5–18 .
Markus , Hazel R. and Shinobu Kitayama ( 1991 ) , “ Culture and the Self : Implications for Cognition , Emotion , and Motivation , ” Psychological Review , 98 ( 2 ) , 224–53 .
Masuda , Takahiko and Shinobu Kitayama ( 2004 ) , “ Perceiver- Induced Constraint and Attitude Attribution in Japan and the US : A Case for the Cultural Dependence of the Correspon- dence Bias , ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 40 ( 3 ) , 409–416 .
Miller , Joan G. ( 1984 ) , “ Culture and the Development of Every- day Social Explanation , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psy- chology , 46 ( 5 ) , 961–78 .
Miyamoto , Yuri and Shinobu Kitayama ( 2002 ) , “ Cultural Vari- ation in Correspondence Bias : The Critical Role of Attitude Diagnosticity of Socially Constrained Behavior , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 83 ( 5 ) , 1239–48 .
Ng , Sharon and Michael J. Houston ( 2006 ) , “ Exemplars or Beliefs ?
The Impact of Self-View on the Nature and Rela- tive Influence of Brand Associations , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 32 ( 4 ) , 519–29 .
Nielsen ( 2011 ) , “ January 2011 : Online Video Usage Up 45 % , ” Nielsenwire , ( February 11 ) , ( accessed July 12 , 2012 ) , [ available at http : //blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/online_mobile/january- 2011-online-video-usage-up-45/ ] .
Nisbett , Richard E. , Craig Caputo , Patricia Legant , and Jeanne Marecek ( 1973 ) , “ Behavior as Seen by the Actor and as Seen by the Observer , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 27 ( 2 ) , 154–64 .
Novak , Thomas P. , Donna L. Hoffman , and Yiu-Fai Yung ( 2000 ) , “ Measuring the Customer Experience in Online Environments , ” Marketing Science , 19 ( 1 ) , 22–42 .
Omodei , Mary M. and Alexander J .
Wearing ( 1990 ) , “ Need Sat- isfaction and Involvement in Personal Projects : Toward an Integrative Model of Subjective Well-Being , ” Journal of Per- sonality and Social Psychology , 59 ( 4 ) , 762–69 .
Pham , Michel Tuan and Tarmar Avnet ( 2004 ) , “ Ideals and Oughts and the Reliance on Affect Versus Substance in Persuasion , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 30 ( March ) , 503–518 .
Pine , B. Joseph and James H. Gilmore ( 1999 ) , The Experience Economy : Work Is Theater & Every Business a Stage .
Boston : Harvard Business School Press .
Pronin , Emily and Lee Ross ( 2006 ) , “ Temporal Differences in Trait Self-Ascription : When the Self Is Seen as an Other , ” Jour- nal of Personality and Social Psychology , 90 ( 2 ) , 197–209 .
Ross , Lee ( 1977 ) , “ The Intuitive Psychologist and His Shortcom- ings : Distortions in the Attribution Process , ” in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , Vol .
10 , L. Berkowitz , ed .
New York : Academic Press , 173–220 .
966 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , DECEMBER 2012 Singelis , Theodore M. ( 1994 ) , “ The Measurement of Independent and Interdependent Self-Construals , ” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 20 ( 5 ) , 580–91 .
Spreng , Richard A. , Scott B. MacKenzie , and Richard W. Olshavsky ( 1996 ) , “ A Reexamination Determinants of Con- sumer Satisfaction , ” Journal of Marketing , 60 ( July ) , 15–32 .
Trope , Yaacov and Nira Liberman ( 2003 ) , “ Temporal Construal , ” Psychological Review , 110 ( July ) , 403–421 .
and ( 2010 ) , “ Construal-Level Theory of Psycho- logical Distance , ” Psychological Review , 117 ( 2 ) , 440–63 .
Vallacher , Robin R. and Daniel M. Wegner ( 1989 ) , “ Levels of Personal Agency : Individual Variation in Action Identifica- tion , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 ( 4 ) , 660–71 .
Watson , David ( 1982 ) , “ The Actor and the Observer : How Are Their Perceptions of Causality Divergent ? ” Psychological Bul- letin , 92 ( 3 ) , 682–700 .
, Lee Anna Clark , and Auke Tellegen ( 1988 ) , “ Develop- ment and Validation of Brief Measures of Positive and Neg- ative : The PANAS Scales , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 ( 5 ) , 1063–1070 .
Wu , Shali and Boaz Keysar ( 2007 ) , “ The Effect of Cul- ture on Perspective-Taking , ” Psychological Science , 18 ( 7 ) , 600–607 .
Zhao , Min , Steve Hoeffler , and Gal Zauberman ( 2007 ) , “ Mental Simulation and Preference Consistency over Time : The Role of Process- Versus Outcome-Focused Thoughts , ” Journal of Mar- keting Research , 44 ( August ) , 379–88 .
Copyright of Journal of Marketing Research ( JMR ) is the property of American Marketing Association and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder 's express written permission .
However , users may print , download , or email articles for individual use .
