Ballinger_ExpEco_2011_PkZr.pdf
aLQ3BBBUWlVP_UHRvX_wyiIS3Xd0-Ballinger_ExpEco_2011_PkZr.pdf.plain.html

Exp Econ (2011) 14:349–374 DOI 10.1007/s10683-010-9271-3 Saving behavior and cognitive abilities T. Parker Ballinger · Eric Hudson · Leonie Karkoviata · Nathaniel T. Wilcox Received: 8 May 2009 / Accepted: 20 December 2010 / Published online: 20 February 2011 © Economic Science Association 2011 Abstract Experiments on saving behavior reveal substantial heterogeneity of behav- ior and performance. We show that this heterogeneity is reliable and examine sev- eral potential sources of it, including cognitive ability and personality scales. The strongest predictors of both behavior and performance are two cognitive ability mea- sures. We conclude that complete explanations of heterogeneity in dynamic decision making require attention to complexity and individual differences in cognitive con- straints. This research was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation with award numbers SES-0350748 (Ballinger) and SES-0350565 (Wilcox), as well as by the University of Houston Research Council. We are grateful to Randall Engle and Richard Heitz of the Attention and Working Memory Lab at Georgia Tech for providing us with their “automatic operation span” software (and advice from D. Stephen Lindsay that led us to them). Bram Cadsby, Glenn Harrison, Ondrej Rydval, Tomomi Tanaka, Mark Thompson, two anonymous referees and the editor provided help or useful commentary, and Sharon O’Donnell and Rick Wilson provided valuable advice on software programming. None of these people are responsible for any errors that remain. Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s10683-010-9271-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. T.P. Ballinger Department of Economics and Finance, Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches, TX 75962-3009, USA E. Hudson New Mexico Public Defender Department, Las Cruces, NM 88001, USA L. Karkoviata College of Business, University of Houston-Downtown, Houston, TX 77002, USA N.T. Wilcox () Economic Science Institute, Chapman University, Orange, CA 92866, USA e-mail: nwilcox@chapman.edu 350 T.P. Ballinger et al. Keywords Bounded rationality · Heterogeneity · Cognitive abilities · Consumption and saving JEL Classification C91 · D91 · E21 Behavioral heterogeneity is a major theme in the empirical literature on consumption and saving. Work by Hall and Mishkin (1982) and Campbell and Mankiw (1990) suggested that economies might be composed of a mixture of households—some rel- atively forward-looking and others relatively myopic. Hey and Dardanoni (1988) first documented behavioral heterogeneity in laboratory saving experiments, and individ- ual differences in attention to the future can organize much of this (Ballinger et al. 2003; Carbone and Hey 2004; Carbone 2006).1 Here we show that this heterogeneity of saving behavior is large and reliable, and that cognitive ability differences explain both an appreciable amount of performance heterogeneity and heterogeneity of esti- mated forward-looking attention in consumption and saving. The term “bounded rationality” is used in many ways. In general, we mean the view that constraints on human cognition explain many deviations from canon- ical theories of rational reasoning, inference and decision making (Nisbett and Ross 1980). Some economists discuss these constraints with standard economic metaphors, arguing that they give rise to computational costs (e.g. Conlisk 1980; Wilcox 1993a, 1993b; Gabaix and Laibson 2000). Camerer and Hogarth (1999) ex- plain how cognitive abilities may be thought of as “cognitive capital” within a “cog- nitive capital and labor” production theory of decision making performance.2 Cognitive abilities might be specific to particular “domains” of decision making. In that event, knowing that a person’s decision making in one domain is constrained by specific cognitive constraints tells us little or nothing about his decision making in another domain. Nevertheless, theory and measurement of domain-general cogni- tive abilities has been a central topic of psychology for a century. From Spearman (1904) to Carroll (1993), it has been known that performance is positively correlated across a great variety of mental tasks, and there is widespread agreement that some relatively domain-general cognitive abilities exist3 (though learned domain-specific abilities are a large part of human performance as well). Although any of several cognitive ability measures might be useful measures of general cognitive capital in- volved in economic decision making, none of the mental tasks considered in this old 1Brown et al. (2009) is an exception. But since they use subjects at two highly selective universities, this does not conflict with the notion that heterogeneity of cognitive abilities explains cross-sectional variance in performance. 2Psychological models of error/effort tradeoffs anticipate these ideas (Russo 1978; Beach and Mitchell 1978; Payne et al. 1988). Various empirical results support such approaches (Conlisk 1996), at least in part. 3Debates continue as to whether there are one or several domain-general abilities (Hunt 1999), just how domain-general any cognitive ability is (see e.g. Shah and Miyake 1996 versus Kane et al. 2004), and whether any relatively general abilities can be augmented by training, experience and/or strategies (e.g. Turley-Ames and Whitfield 2003). Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 351 and extensive psychological literature are decision making situations that preoccupy economists. Frederick (2005) and Benjamin et al. (2006) find that various measures of cog- nitive ability explain cross-sectional variation in well-known risk and time prefer- ence phenomena associated with simple binary choices between lotteries and dated payments. These results encourage us, but our interest lies with complex economic problem-solving like dynamic consumption and saving under income risk. Relatively simple decision tasks are perhaps ideal for revealing preference differences across subjects and treatments precisely because complexity has been designed out as a causal factor.4 But relatively simple decision problems may censor the potential abil- ity of the least cognitively constrained subjects.5 We can design dynamic decision making tasks that are relatively easy to explain to subjects yet still computationally challenging. Note, however, that relatively challenging tasks could have paradoxical effects: They might cause an increased propensity to give up on conscious analysis, or might encourage many subjects to employ similar simplification procedures.6 There- fore, it is not obvious that increased task complexity and/or difficulty will enhance the explanatory force of differences in cognitive abilities. Our experimental design varies the “difficulty” of income streams in a controlled way both within and be- tween individuals, and the results show a relatively strong effect of cognitive abilities for relatively “easy” income streams but less consistent effects for “hard” ones. Measures of cognitive abilities are extremely varied. Therefore, our experimen- tal design is sequential: Initial samples examine several promising measures, and the most successful ones are then validated in new samples to protect against pretest bias. Two measures seem particularly useful. First, two analytical subtests of the Beta III test of nonverbal reasoning (Kellogg and Morton 1999) consistently predict perfor- mance and behavior in our saving game. This test is neither mathematical nor verbal: It is based purely on reasoning about visual images, and this finding bears on domain- generality. Choice under risk and over time, and indeed complex saving decisions, might be viewed by some as “math tests of a different name:” If so, one might be relatively unimpressed when a math-based measure of cognitive ability predicts such decisions. Similarly, we might regard a verbally-based ability test, such as a verbal SAT score, as simply predicting how well subjects understand verbal and/or written instructions of a laboratory decision problem. In the case of a wholly image-based test like the Beta III, such worries are less compelling: We are perhaps seeing something that truly generalizes across domains. We also find that a “working memory span” (or WM span) test consistently pre- dicts performance and behavior in our saving game. These tests are regarded as mea- 4Of course, this is not obvious: Specific cognitive capital may be primarily adapted to handle field envi- ronments with specific complexities and/or institutional features, and may function poorly in lab situations stripped of these (Winkler and Murphy 1973; Dyer and Kagel 1996; Harrison and List 2004). 5Gabaix and Laibson (2000) make a related design point. Note, however, that differences in cognitive abil- ities are known to predict failures of reasoning even in the simplest canonical reasoning tasks (Stanovich and West 2000), as well as simple risk, time and fairness preferences (Frederick 2005; Benjamin et al. 2006). 6For instance, Hogarth’s (1975) simple decision cost model predicts that decision effort and time will ultimately decrease after complexity rises above some critical level. 352 T.P. Ballinger et al. suring the capacity for controlled allocation of attention and thought (Conway et al. 2005). A large number of studies over the last two decades strongly suggest that WM span is a robust, domain-general predictor of intelligent performance.7 WM span tests correlate more strongly with performance in many different reasoning tests (with widely varying surface features) than performance in those same tests correlate with one another (Engle et al. 1999; Engle and Kane 2004): WM span is a leading candidate for a domain-general cognitive capital measure. Cognitive abilities may be correlated with various preferential, personality and de- mographic differences that might truly account for heterogeneity in saving behavior. This is why a multivariate analysis that includes other potentially correlated predic- tors will be more compelling than simple bivariate relationships between economic behavior and cognitive abilities. We do find a robustly significant effect of measured cognitive abilities on saving behavior and performance, even when we control for several other potential predictors (demographic and personality differences) that may be correlated with cognitive abilities. In this respect, our study goes beyond existing correlational studies that mostly rely on bivariate evidence, such as Stanovich and West (2000) and Frederick (2005). 1 Theory and experimental design 1.1 Saving game mechanics and theory Each subject s plays five independent rounds r of a saving game. For now we sup- press the round subscript r to concentrate on the mechanics of a single round. Each round has t = 1,2, . . . ,20 periods and begins with exogenous “starter savings” of A1 = 2 ECUs (experimental currency units) at the start of period 1. An i.i.d. random income ỹ, equal to either 0 or 6 ECUs with equal probability, is also received at the start of every period t (including period 1). Let yst be actual income received at the start of period t by s. After observing this, cash-in-hand Xst = Ast + yst is available to s for consumption and saving, where Ast = Xst−1 − cst−1 ≥ 0 ∀t > 1 is her saving accumulated prior to period t . Subject s then chooses integer-valued consumption cst ∈ [0,Xst ], leaving savings equal to Ast+1 = Xst − cst for future periods. The con- sumption choice cst purchases “points” according to the utility function u(ct ) below, which we constructed to meet a specific design goal discussed shortly.8 7WM span measures may also reflect individual differences in prefrontal cortex function in the brain (Kane and Engle 2002). The prefrontal cortex is implicated in delay of current gratification for a delayed reward, as well as various planning behavior. This seems (at least potentially) particularly relevant to consumption and saving. 8Ballinger et al. (2003) used a discrete approximation of a CRRA utility function with σ = 3 and a con- sumption floor; this utility function roughly resembles a CRRA function with σ ≈ 2 (and a consumption floor). Both coefficients are within ranges of estimates one sees in the survey-based econometric literature on consumption and saving. Experimentalists are used to seeing estimates of σ ≈ 0.5 from their risky choice data, but those estimates are based on choices over relatively small monetary gains. Greater local curvature of the estimated function will be required over large absolute consumption levels to generate similar amounts of local risk aversion. Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 353 ct 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 ≥15 u(ct ) 0 26 51 65 77 89 101 104 107 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 If the subject’s goal is to maximize expected total points accumulated by the end of a round, the problem faced by a subject in each period of a round is max ct u(ct ) + Et 20∑ j=t+1 u(cj ), subject to Aj+1 = Xj − cj ∀j = t, t + 1, . . . ,19, given Xt = At + yt . (1) This is a 20-period simplified version of what Browning and Lusardi (1996) dubbed the “standard additive model” of life-cycle consumption and saving. With the strict borrowing constraints and utility function specified above, the model yields precau- tionary motives for saving against future income uncertainty. The simple i.i.d. bi- nomial income process, and the absence of utility discounting or returns on saving, make this simplified version of the standard additive saving game relatively trans- parent and easy to explain to subjects. Yet it is still computationally difficult: Such problems usually have no analytical solution (see, e.g., Deaton 1992), and ex ante optimal consumption policy functions cot (Xt ,20) for problem 1 can only be found by computational methods, using backward iteration and search. This is how we solve for these optimal policy functions.9 Let Y = {y1, y2, . . . , y20} denote any 20-period income sequence or “stream.” Applied sequentially to any stream Y, cot (Xt ,20) will generate an ex post sum of point purchases over a game, denoted by Uo(Y,20). We also define a class of boundedly rational policy functions for a 20-period game. Imagine ex ante optimal policy functions cop(Xp, τ) for versions of problem 1 with final periods or “horizons” τ < 20 and periods p = 1,2, . . . , τ (rather than periods t = 1,2, . . . ,20). One could apply those policy functions to stream Y of a 20-period game by setting p = max{1, t + τ − 20} and substituting cash-in-hand Xt for Xp in the policy function cop(Xp, τ). Let U o(Y, τ ) denote the ex post point total achieved by doing this. This is the point total of a player who optimally plans ahead at most τ −1 periods and ignores all periods beyond that. This “myopically optimal planning” is less computationally burdensome, and so defines a class of boundedly rational policies that are central to both our experimental design and data analysis. 1.2 Dependent measures: policy quality, policy consistency and performance We can estimate subjects’ apparent horizons of optimization τ s from their observed 20-period vectors of consumption decisions. This is a convenient scalar summary of the structure of subject behavior and one way of characterizing their degree of 9Since everything is discrete (income process, randomness, subject consumption choices etc.) and finite (e.g. 20-period horizon), no approximation is needed: Computational solutions for the optimal policy func- tions are exact. 354 T.P. Ballinger et al. bounded rationality. We use the nonlinear least squares estimation of τ s described by Ballinger et al. (2003); see the Appendix for a short summary. Each estimate τ̂ s implies a root mean squared error rmses of the consumption decisions of subject s around the consumption policy choices implied by τ̂ s , which we interpret as noise or inconsistency in the behavior of subject s. Together, τ̂ s and rmses are a bivari- ate characterization of subject behavior. These measures may be computed for each subject s assuming policy stability across all rounds r , or they may be computed sep- arately for each round r played by each subject s (for instance, to decompose learning into policy improvement versus consistency improvement), in which case we write τ̂ sr and rmse s r . Ballinger, Palumbo and Wilcox note that there are strongly diminish- ing marginal gains to having a less myopic policy (higher τ), so we use ln(τ̂ sr ) as a dependent measure rather than τ̂ sr itself, calling it “policy quality.” We call −rmsesr “policy consistency” and also use it as a dependent measure. A univariate summary measure of behavior is also useful. The most natural one is a suitable measure of performance. Performance measures, and forecasts of per- formance based on previous experimental results, play a large role in our experi- mental design, the manner in which we motivate subjects in the experiment, and in our data analysis as well. To begin, notice that Uo(Y,1) is the ex post point total of the policy co1(Xt ,1) ≡ Xt (given stream Y). This “nil policy” spends all of its cash-in-hand every period (as if the game lasts only one period). Since this policy does nothing to smooth consumption or accumulate precautionary stocks, its ex post point total Uo(Y,1) is an important baseline for measuring performance. Any sub- ject who engages in minimally sensible consumption smoothing and precautionary saving should do no worse thanUo(Y,1).10 At the other extreme, Uo(Y,20) is the ex post point total of the ex ante optimal policy cot (Xt ,20): No policy (and no subject) does systematically better than this.11 Therefore, Uo(Y,20) − Uo(Y,1) is the ex post point gain (given stream Y) of ex ante full rationality over nil rationality. If subject s earns Us(Y ) total points from stream Y , her actual point gain over nil rationality is Us(Y ) − Uo(Y,1). We measure the performance of subject s with stream Y , written P s(Y ), as the ratio of these two differences: P s(Y ) = [Us(Y ) − Uo(Y,1)]/[Uo(Y,20) − Uo(Y,1)]. (2) 10There are some policies, such as “save and binge” policies, that perform systematically worse than the nil policy. These save everything for k ≥ 1 periods, then spend everything, and repeat. On the basis of past results, we expected actual point totals below Uo(Y,1) to be rare. In fact it occurs more than once (in two or more rounds) for about 1 in 20 subjects and, as explained later, we omit such subjects from our statistical analysis. 11By “systematically,” we mean that expected performance of any policy is definitionally no greater than the expectation of Uo(Y,20) across all streams Y. But suboptimal policies can by luck outperform the optimal policy for specific streams. The simplest way to see this is to consider a “clairvoyant policy” for some particular stream Y ′(it is optimal given perfect foresight of Y ′): Obviously such a policy is different from, and must outperform, the ex ante optimal policy applied to stream Y ′. A subject could by luck use a policy on stream Y ′ that resembles the clairvoyant policy for stream Y ′ , and so earn more points than the ex ante optimal policy does. We observe a small handful of subjects who earn more points than the optimal policy in some round of the saving game, as one could expect on the basis of these considerations. Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 355 1.3 Motivation of subjects To motivate subjects, we truncate the performance measure (2) to the unit interval,12 that is P s∗(Y ) = max(0,min[1,P s(Y )]). Let D be a maximum cash payment avail- able for each round. We reward subject s by paying her P s∗(Y ) · D—a fraction of D equal to her truncated performance in the round.13 Ballinger et al. (2003) observed that inexperienced median subjects plan ahead about two periods (optimal for a 3-period game). Therefore, we use Uo(Y,3) as a forecast of the ex post point to- tal of a median inexperienced subject in our own saving game (given stream Y).14 We use this prior information to design our game. Replacing Us(Y ) (actual point total of subject s) with Uo(Y,3) in (2), we forecast performance by PF(Y ) = [Uo(Y,3) − Uo(Y,1)]/[Uo(Y,20) − Uo(Y,1)]. (3) Using computational methods, we chose our income process and the utility function u(ct ) shown earlier to make the median value (across all possible income streams Y) of this “performance forecast” as small as possible, subject to the requirements that the utility function remains concave and that the income process remains a simple i.i.d. Bernoulli process (so that it is transparently explained to subjects). The result- ing median performance forecast for the design is about 0.585. We do this to make a reasonable expectation of suboptimal behavior as painful to the subject as we can.15 If this performance forecast is roughly accurate and D is large, most subjects will have something to learn across rounds of the saving game and an appreciable in- centive to learn it. With D = $7.00 per round, the forecast implies that the median inexperienced subject will leave an expected $7.00(1 − 0.585) = $2.90 “on the ta- ble” in the first round played. So, the expected opportunity cost of persisting in the forecast median behavior (not learning anything) across all five rounds would be 5 · $2.90 = $14.50 to the median subject. Easily stated heuristic policies can perform much better than the median forecast behavior in the saving game. For instance, this heuristic policy captures a single para- graph of advice written by a subject who did rather well: 12The performance measure in (2) can occasionally fall outside of the unit interval for reasons elaborated in footnotes 10 and 11. 13Call this the direct money method. Another way is to pay D with probability P s∗(Y ), and zero otherwise: This is the well-known binary lottery method. The binary lottery method is more complex, and so less transparent to subjects; and its advertised incentive-compatibility is empirically suspect (Millner and Pratt 1992; Selten et al. 1999). We checked for significant differences in our dependent measures between the two methods in our first sample of 48 subjects (24 subjects were paid by each of these methods) and, finding none, used the direct money method in later samples. 14Half of our subject pool is identical to that used by Ballinger et al. (2003). The other half consists of students at a somewhat less selective university, so Uo(Y,3) might perhaps be somewhat above the expectation of Us(Y ) there, but this also suits our purposes. 15In fact, this is also one of our main reasons for rewarding subjects according to the performance measure, rather than directly in terms of point totals. Other things equal, the “cost of misbehavior” (Harrison 1989) in an experiment (the opportunity cost of suboptimal behavior) should be as large as an experimenter can manage. Rewarding subjects directly in terms of their point total, rather than the gain of their point total over the nil policy as we do here, results in a much lower opportunity cost of suboptimal behavior for any given stake D. 356 T.P. Ballinger et al. Rule 1: If you are in the last period, or if your cash-in-hand is 2 or less in any period, then spend all of your cash-in-hand. If Rule 1 doesn’t apply, go to Rule 2. Rule 2: If you are in any of periods 16 to 19, spend half of your cash-in-hand (round up if half of cash-in-hand is not an integer). If Rules 1 and 2 don’t apply, go to Rule 3. Rule 3: If your cash-in-hand is less than or equal to 12, spend 2. Otherwise, spend 6. Across all income streams used in our experiment, this policy has an average per- formance of about 0.915—well above the median performance forecast of 0.585 in our design, based on the results of Ballinger et al. (2003). That is, some subjects can write down relatively simple heuristic policies that are quite good (cf. Thaler 1994) in the sense that they improve substantially on what median subjects actually seem to have done in past experiments.16 Subject instructions included a detailed exercise meant to make the period utility function highly salient, and a test of subjects’ understanding of the calculation of the truncated performance measure P s∗(Y ) which would determine their payment.17 While subjects are paid for their performance in all five rounds, our design treats the first round of the saving game as extra instruction time: An experimenter sits with subjects during the first few periods of the first round to answer questions, and meets each subject at the end of the first round to gauge understanding and prompt for questions (after this, subjects are on their own). So we do not use first round behavior in our data analysis, and will present evidence below showing that this design feature was a sensible precaution. Recall that the point totals Uo(Y,20) and Uo(Y,1) determine performance and payment. Subjects received no technical description of these totals. Rather, instruc- tions described them as the point totals achieved by a good strategy (the “good score”) and a poor strategy (the “poor score”), respectively, facing each income stream the subject would face. These two point totals were only revealed to a subject at the con- clusion of each round, along with a computation of performance and earnings for that round. Subjects know the functional form of their payoff function while playing each round: They understand that they start earning cash once their point total exceeds Uo(Y,1) and cease to earn cash should their point total exceed Uo(Y,20), and that between these extremes points convert to cash at the rate D/[Uo(Y,20) − Uo(Y,1)]. But they play each round in ignorance of Uo(Y,1) and Uo(Y,20)—only learning these at the end of each round. Announcing Uo(Y,20) and Uo(Y,1) at the beginning of a round would reveal imperfect but potentially useful information about the coming income stream; and knowing if or when point totals exceed Uo(Y,20) would end extrinsic motivation for the rest of the round (though this rarely happens). 16All subjects wrote advice for a hypothetical future subject at the conclusion of their session. This was a pilot examination of written advice undertaken for planning a future experiment: Subjects were not rewarded for it, nor did we intend to use it for this study in any systematic way. So except for this specific example, which we use here for illustrative purposes, we do not formally analyze written advice in this paper. 17See our Supplementary Material for the subject instructions. Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 357 For those steeped in the salience and dominance precepts (Smith 1982) of the field, this is a controversial payoff method, so we need a good reason for using it. Note this feature of the method: There is a time, just after the subject has completed a saving game round with stream Y but before Uo(Y,1) and Uo(Y,20) have been revealed, when the subject has experienced the task but does not yet know how well she has done. We needed to pilot and vet a payoff method with this precise feature for future planned research on social learning processes. For boundedly rational agents, it can be hard to know one’s own performance in a task. In the planned research, we wish to exogenously vary this self-knowledge as a treatment. In the planned research, subjects write advice for a future subject who will confront the same task, and we will exogenously vary: (1) whether that advice-writer does or does not know their own performance when writing advice; and (2) whether advice receivers do or do not know the advice-writer’s performance when deciding how much credence to give to received advice. All of this can only be done using a payoff procedure that can keep subjects “blind” to their own performance (or someone else’s performance) unless or until the experimenter wishes to reveal it to them. In the current experiment we find behavior and performance quite similar to what our performance forecast based on Ballinger et al. (2003) predicts. This suggests that our unusual payoff method has no appreciable unintended or adverse motivational consequences. 1.4 The design: specifics of the income streams To measure learning in a model-free way, with first round behavior omitted by design, we present each subject with the same income stream twice, in the second and fifth rounds. The learning measure is Ls = P s5 (Y sl ) − P s2 (Y sl ) : P sr (Y ) is the performance of subject s in round r with income stream Y , and Y sl is the stream presented to subject s in both rounds two and five. It is possible that recognition of the round two stream could bias round five performance upward and inflate this measure of learning. However, statistically strong evidence of learning is apparent by round four, which is never a within-subject repetition of an earlier stream. Put differently, the design does not depend solely on the repeated income streams for evidence of learning, and the other evidence points to learning that is of a very similar strength and size. Since our design deliberately repeats one stream for each subject, our subjects are not actually receiving truly random income draws across all periods and rounds. Other things equal, true randomness is desirable, but we believe that the goal of mea- suring learning in a model-free way is worth this deviation from standard practice— provided that our results resemble prior results in most essential respects, and we later argue that this is true. Since we deliberately repeat one stream for each subject, we should make the streams subjects actually receive approximately representative of the actual distribution of truly random 20-period binomial streams. While doing this, we also exploit the opportunity to create another design feature that allows us to measure the interaction between cognitive ability and the difficulty of the saving game. To reduce between-subjects variance of the learning measure Ls attributable to streams (rather than subject behavior), we pre-selected the repeated streams Y sl so that while they vary across subjects, their “difficulty” is held constant in a specific sense 358 T.P. Ballinger et al. defined in terms of the performance forecast in (3). We draw 10,000 truly random streams Y to approximate the actual distribution of PF(Y ), the performance forecast. The 90th, 50th and 10th quantiles of this approximate distribution are PF90 = 0.73, PF50 = 0.585 and PF10 = 0.475, and we regard streams Y with performance fore- casts PF(Y ) near these three quantiles as relatively easy, moderate and hard streams, respectively.18 We select three sets of streams with performance forecasts near these three quantiles: The set E (easy streams) is 16 streams with PF(Y ) near PF90; the set M (moderate streams) is 16 streams with PF(Y ) near PF50; and the set H (hard streams) is 16 streams with PF(Y ) near PF10. Additionally, streams within each set are chosen so that the distribution of total income ∑ Y = ∑yt across the 16 streams in each set resembles the true distribution of total income across truly random 20- period streams.19 Each subject plays five rounds of the saving game. Every subject experiences three rounds with moderate difficulty streams from M, one round with a hard stream from H, and one round with an easy stream from E. The experiences of all subjects are matched in this sense, although they receive streams with varying total income and experience the various “difficulties” in different orders. Each subject receives a single stream Y sl from M in their second and fifth round to measure learning unam- biguously, and a different stream from M in either their first, third or fourth round. Additionally they receive a stream from H and a stream from E in their first, third or fourth round. The six possible orderings of stream difficulties across rounds one, three and four is balanced across subjects. This allows us see whether income stream difficulty (as represented by 10th, 50th and 90th quantiles of the performance forecast PF(Y )) conditions any relationship between cognitive ability and behavior.20 Across each sequence of 16 subjects and five game rounds, each income stream in M is used exactly twice, and each income stream in H and E is used exactly once. Since there are six distinct orders of income stream difficulty across rounds one, three and four), the minimum number of subjects required to have balanced variation of these orders (that is also a multiple of 16) is 48 total subjects. We call each such balanced group of 48 subjects a “sample,” and we have four such samples for a total of 192 subjects. For pooled bivariate analysis of performance levels, as opposed to 18The “difficulty” of a stream mostly reflects the number and/or length of runs of “bad luck” (zero income draws) in it, conditional on total income received. Recall that the performance forecast is based on the use of a policy that optimally plans ahead for just two future periods. This policy performs increasingly poorly in the face of runs of three or more zero income draws. 19The set size (16 total income streams) was the minimum size needed to roughly approximate the true sampling distribution of total income in sequences of 20 income draws. The distribution of total income across streams in each set is: 1 stream with ∑ Y = 42; 2 streams with ∑Y = 48; 3 streams with ∑Y = 54; 4 streams with ∑ Y = 60; 3 streams with ∑Y = 66; 2 streams with ∑Y = 72; and 1 stream with∑ Y = 78. In our Supplementary Materials, we show how the resulting collection of 48 streams resembles the advertised income process in its sample distributions of total income and sample autocorrelation coef- ficients. We also show that subject experiences of the five income streams they actually receive give them no more evidence to reject the advertised (binomial, i.i.d.) income process than would true draws from the advertised income process. 20More specifically, by deliberately varying just three ordered difficulty levels, we can do this without making an assumption about the functional way (e.g. linear, quadratic, etc.) in which difficulty conditions any relationship between cognitive ability and our dependent measures. Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 359 learning, we will use average performance across rounds two through five (omitting the first round for reasons discussed above), P s = (P s2 + P s3 + P s4 + P s5 )/4, as the overall performance of subject s.21 1.5 Cognitive and personality measures Table 1 lists all cognitive and personality measures used in any of our samples. Our first two samples (96 subjects in all) are used to select two promising cognitive abil- ity tests. Then, we retested those promising measures in the third and fourth sam- ples (another 96 subjects) to validate their promise. This procedure guards against pretest bias. Three of the cognitive tests—the “Porteus Maze” (Porteus 1965) and two versions of “Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices” (Raven et al. 1998)—were discarded after the second sample because they showed less promise than the two tests described below.22 The “Beta III” (Kellogg and Morton 1999) is the third generation of a nonverbal test of cognitive abilities originally developed during the First World War to screen literate and illiterate United States military recruits on a more equal footing. In the first sample, we administered the entire Beta III test. Results there suggested that the sum of its two analytical subtests, “picture absurdities” and “matrix reasoning”,23 are the best predictor of saving performance, so we continued using these two subtests in the third and fourth samples. The second test is one of those collectively known as “working memory” or WM span tests. Specifically, it is a recently developed computer-administered version of the “operation span” test of Turner and Engle (1989). All WM span tests have a com- mon structure. A sequence of items are presented to the subject, with each presen- tation separated by a “distractor” task that requires conscious effort.24 The subject must then reproduce the presented items in sequence. These tests are regarded as measuring the capacity for controlled allocation of attention and thought (Conway 21Because there is systematic variation across subjects in the difficulty of income streams presented in the third and fourth rounds, this is not a minimum variance measure of overall performance levels. As will be clear in panel analysis later, though, income stream difficulty (though highly significant) explains a relatively small amount of the variance in performance; so this does not turn out to be an empirically important matter here. 22See our Supplementary Material for details on these discarded tests. 23The Beta III test is proprietary, so we cannot show examples of its items. In the “picture absurdities” subtest, subjects identify a missing element in grayscale illustrations of people, objects, rooms, scenes, landscapes, etc. In the “matrix reasoning” subtest, subjects choose an icon from an offered collection that best fits a missing entry in a matrix of icons. Both are thus “pattern completion” tests—the first using natural, semantically rich image patterns, the second using abstract, nonmeaningful visual icon patterns. These portions of the Beta III were used under license from Harcourt Assessment. Today, the Beta III is available through Pearson Assessment. 24In the operation span test we use, letters are briefly presented in some sequence, interleaved with simple arithmetic equations that are either true or false. Subjects must ascertain the truth value of each equation as it appears, while maintaining the letters in memory. At the conclusion of each sequence of letters, subjects are asked to recall the presented sequence of letters in correct order. This basic task is repeated many times for letter sequences of varying length; overall test scores are based on the number of letters correctly remembered in their correct serial locations after each basic task. For more details, see Conway et al. (2005). 360 T.P. Ballinger et al. Ta bl e 1 Su m m ar y of co gn iti ve ,m ot iv at io na la nd pe rs on al ity m ea su re s, an d w hi ch sa m pl es ha ve th em M ea su re cl as s M ea su re C hi ef re fe re nc e w or ks an d br ie f de sc ri pt io n Sa m pl es 1s t 2n d 3r d & 4t h C og ni tiv e sc al es B et a II I K el lo gg an d M or to n (1 99 9) . Te st s of no nv er ba l re as on in g an d co gn i- tiv e fu nc tio ns . U se d fo r ne ar ly a ce nt ur y. W e us e re as on in g pa rt on ly (c om bi na tio n of sc or es on te st s 2 an d 5) . X X Po rt eu s m az e Po rt eu s (1 96 5) .M az e- th re ad in g w ith pe nc il. C la im ed to m ea su re bo th pl an ni ng ab ili ty an d im pu ls e co nt ro l. X R av en SP M + R av en et al .( 19 98 ). N on ve rb al pa tte rn in du ct io n or “m at ri x re as on in g” te st . W id el y us ed in co nt em po ra ry re se ar ch on co gn iti ve fu nc tio ni ng an d in te lli ge nc e. X R av en SP M Sa m e as ab ov e, bu ts om ew ha ta bb re vi at ed an d si m pl er ve rs io n (w ith ou t th e ad de d up pe r- ta il se ns iti vi ty of th e “+ ” ve rs io n) X W or ki ng m em or y sp an C on w ay et al .( 20 05 ). T he “o pe ra tio n sp an ” te st .T he ab ili ty to co nt ro l at te nt io n an d th ou gh ti n th e fa ce of pr oc es si ng lo ad .A ce nt ra lm ea su re - m en ti n co nt em po ra ry co gn iti ve ps yc ho lo gy . X X In tr in si c m ot iv at io n N ee d fo r co gn iti on C ac io pp o et al . (1 99 6) . It em -r es po ns e- ba se m ea su re of in tr in si c m ot i- va tio n to en ga ge in ef fo rt fu lt ho ug ht . X X Pe rs on al ity sc al es Pr oc ra st in at io n T uc km an (1 99 1) .I te m -r es po ns e- ba se d m ea su re of th e te nd en cy to pr o- cr as tin at e. X X Fo ur di m en si on s of im pu ls iv ity W hi te si de an d Ly na m (2 00 1) . Fo ur ite m -r es po ns e- ba se d m ea su re s of pe rs on al ity ch ar ac te ri st ic s, ea ch th ou gh t to ei th er co nt ri bu te to , or in - hi bi t, im pu ls iv e be ha vi or . Pr em ed ita tio n X X Se ns at io n- se ek in g X X Pe rs ev er an ce X U rg en cy X Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 361 et al. 2005). A large number of studies over the last two decades strongly suggest that WM span is a robust, domain-general predictor of intelligent performance. WM span tests correlate more strongly with performance in many different reasoning tests with widely varying surface features—such as the Raven family of tests, the Tower of Hanoi puzzle (e.g., McDaniel and Rutström 2001), the Beta III test and so forth— than performance in these same tests correlate with one another (Engle et al. 1999; Engle and Kane 2004). Based on promising results in the second sample, we contin- ued measuring WM span in later samples. The surveys in the second, third and fourth samples include an item response bat- tery to measure several potentially relevant personality characteristics. Each item is a statement, and a subject decides how much each statement is descriptive of him or herself, selecting one of four responses (completely false, mostly false, mostly true or completely true). These are numerically coded with the integers 1, 2, 3 and 4 to ordinally concord with the characteristic being measured, and those integer codes are then summed across the relevant items to produce various “personality scales.” These include a “need for cognition” scale, which is thought to measure intrinsic motivation to perform well in cognitively challenging tasks (Cacioppo et al. 1996) and a “pro- crastination” scale (Tuckman 1991). Four scales (premeditation, sensation-seeking, urgency and perseverance) thought to be implicated in impulsive behavior (White- side and Lynam 2001) are also measured (just the first two of these in the second sample, but all four in the third and fourth samples).25 The collection of these per- sonality scales is merely a precaution. Cognitive test scores might be correlated with personality factors, so we check whether our conclusions about cognitive abilities change when the scales are included in multivariate analyses. All subjects were run one at a time in individual sessions that began with a survey and cognitive tests, both of which varied across samples. The first and third sam- ples were collected at a large and diverse urban university, while the second and fourth samples were collected at a smaller and less diverse rural university. In our analyses, an experimental site dummy variable controls for the campus (unity for the urban campus and zero for the rural campus). Subjects were recruited by means of campus-wide advertisements in various media, and are all adult undergraduates. All subjects received a flat $5.00 payment for showing up. Subjects received an additional flat $10.00 payment for completing the surveys, item-response personality measure- ments, and cognitive tests (lasting about 60 to 75 minutes) and were then encouraged to take a short break if desired. Saving game instructions were then presented, and subjects completed five rounds of the game (all taking about 40–50 minutes). The available reward D per round was $7.00, giving a maximum total payment from the five saving games equal to $35.00.26 2 Results In the analyses to follow, we pool samples containing the same cognitive and per- sonality measures. While no measure is common to all four samples, we do examine 25See our Supplementary Material online for more details on each of these personality scales. 26The cognitive tests were more time-consuming for the first sample of 48 subjects. These subjects re- ceived $15.00 for completing the tests rather than $10.00, and had D = $8.00 rather than $7.00. 362 T.P. Ballinger et al. an all-samples pooling to establish certain overall facts and treatment effects and ex- amine the demographic variables gender, age and experimental site. The other three poolings are: (1) The first, third and fourth samples, the broadest pooling where the analytical component of the Beta III test was measured; (2) The second, third and fourth samples, the broadest pooling where WM span was measured (as well as need for cognition, procrastination and two of the impulsiveness subscales); and (3) The third and fourth samples, where we have both cognitive measures and all personality scales. Pretesting ends after the second sample: It is important to keep in mind that results based only on the third and fourth samples are the methodologically cleanest results, since pretest bias is present in results that pool observations from the first and second samples. There were nine subjects (out of 192 total subjects) with negative values of the average or overall performance measure P s and they are a methodological problem. Almost all of them failed to earn any money in two or more rounds of the saving game, so we may have lost control over their motivation. Their round-to-round per- formance is also highly erratic: Adding these nine subjects to the panel regressions described below triples estimated residual variance. Therefore, we omit these nine subjects (roughly 1 in 20 subjects) from all of our statistical analyses below.27 2.1 Policy quality, policy consistency and performance Table 2 shows Pearson correlations (across subjects) between performance measures P sr in different rounds r , illustrating two points. First, the correlations are quite strong across rounds two through five (all significant at p < 0.0001): Between-subject per- formance differences are reliable and, therefore, there is plenty of potentially pre- dictable variance of performance across subjects. Second, correlations between first round performance and performance in later rounds is noticeably weaker (though all significant at p < 0.01). First round performance is also noticeably more variable than in later rounds. This suggests that subjects are still developing an understanding of saving game mechanics during the first round, as we anticipated. So, as originally planned, we do not use the first round data for any further analysis. Overall performance P s is the average of performance P sr across four rounds, so we can use Cronbach’s alpha (Cronbach 1951) to estimate the reliability of P s : It is easily calculated from the correlations in Table 2, and equals 0.87 here.28 Under the assumptions of classical test theory, Cronbach’s alpha is an unbiased estimate of the maximum possible R2 one may obtain in a regression of P s on any set of predictors.29 This is a useful result because it allows us to see how well performance can be decomposed as a linear function of policy quality and policy consistency. The 27Several of these unexpectedly poor-performing subjects used something very like a “save-and-binge” strategy that performs worse than the nil policy (see supra footnote 10). Others apparently had a minimum target level of assets (buffer stock on its head) that they maintained even when this was plainly (and painfully) dominated, for instance spending zero in periods where their cash-on-hand had fallen to their apparent (positive) target level of assets. 28Let ρ̄ be the mean of N(N − 1)/2 bivariate Pearson correlations between N items summed to give an overall measure; then Cronbach’s alpha for that measure is equal to Nρ̄/[1 + (N − 1)ρ̄]. 29The key “assumption of classical test theory” is that the items summed to give the overall measure are one-dimensional in the factor-analytic sense that items measure the same underlying ability. Thinking Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 363 Table 2 Pearson correlations between performance Psr in different rounds r Round 2 Round 3 Round 4 Round 5 Round 1 0.366 0.280 0.250 0.235 Round 2 – 0.589 0.619 0.661 Round 3 – – 0.624 0.597 Round 4 – – – 0.674 Notes: Results are for all four samples, subjects = 183. All correlations are highly significant R2 from a bivariate regression of overall performance P s on policy quality ln(τ̂ s) and policy consistency −rmses is 0.74. The ratio of the R2 = 0.74 to the Cronbach’s alpha of 0.87 is 0.85: Thus policy quality and policy consistency, as defined here in terms of estimated horizons of optimization and residual sums of squares, together account for about 85% of the reliable and explainable variance in overall subject performance. We conclude that performance may be thought of as approximately decompos- able into policy quality and policy consistency as measured here. Put differently, the univariate behavioral measure (performance) and the bivariate behavioral char- acterization (policy quality and policy consistency) are different, but approximately equivalent, low-dimensional characterizations of each subject’s high-dimensional (20-period vector) consumption decisions. What the bivariate characterization allows is a finer-grained analysis of predictors of heterogeneity. We will see that one cog- nitive ability measure seems to mostly explain variations in policy quality, while an- other seems to mostly explain variations in policy consistency. However, we think it is simplest and most natural to begin by analyzing the univariate dependent measure, which is performance. 2.2 Performance Mean performance P sr in rounds r = 2, 3, 4 and 5 is 0.59, 0.60, 0.65 and 0.64, respec- tively. The mean and standard deviation of overall performance P s are 0.62 and 0.22, respectively; its minimum and maximum are 0.060 and 0.996. Thus there is great variability in subject performance, as expected on the basis of past work (Ballinger et al. 2003) and as hoped for our purposes. The mean of the learning measure Ls (change in performance between the second and fifth rounds) is 0.052. This is signif- icantly positive (p = 0.0009 by a one sample t-test), but it is a small effect (about a of each saving game round as a test item, the first principal component of the four round performance measures (for rounds 2 to 5) accounts for 72% of their collective variance, so this assumption seems reasonable. Write P s = P̄ s + ε, where P̄ s is a true nonstochastic but unobserved ability of subject s in these saving games, and ε is i.i.d. error in measuring this, due to the randomness of income streams and/or subject execution. Under the classical assumptions, Cronbach’s alpha is an estimate of the correlation alpha between two identical but separate measurements of P s (here P̄ s is unchanged but there are new draws of ε). It is then easy to show that alpha ≡ Var(P̄ s )/Var(P s). This is the expected explainable sum of squares divided by the expected total sum of squares, since P̄ s is the nonstochastic, repeatable and predictable part of P s . Hence, Cronbach’s alpha estimates the maximum possible R2 in a regression of P s on any set of regressors. 364 T.P. Ballinger et al. quarter of the standard deviation of P s) and Ls is almost as variable across subjects (standard deviation of 0.21) as are average performance levels. Learning is significant by round 4 (which is not a within-subject repetition of an earlier stream), so memory of the round 2 income stream is an insufficient explanation of observed learning. For instance, the mean is of P s4 − P s2 across all subjects s is 0.059 (significantly positive by a one-sample t-test, p = 0.0003). Confining attention to the 62 subjects who re- ceived a moderate difficulty stream in round 4 (recall that only one out of three round 4 streams are of moderate difficulty while all round 2 streams are), the mean P s4 −P s2 is 0.063 (significantly positive by a one-sample t-test, p = 0.027). Table 3 shows bivariate relationships between average performanceP s , demo- graphic variables and our measures of cognitive abilities and personality scales, in Table 3 Spearman rank correlations between average performance levels and demographic, cognitive and personality variables in various poolings of samples Variable class Variable All samples Samples Samples Samples 1, 3 & 4 2, 3 & 4 3 & 4 Subjects = 183 Subjects = 139 Subjects = 135 Subjects = 91 Demographic Female −0.14∗ −0.14∗ −0.19∗∗ −0.22∗∗ variables p = 0.059 p = 0.088 p = 0.024 p = 0.033 Age 0.031 −0.0058 0.084 0.073 p = 0.67 p = 0.12 p = 0.33 p = 0.49 Urban Campus 0.089 0.12 0.13 0.17* p = 0.23 p = 0.16 p = 0.12 p = 0.099 Cognitive Beta III – 0.28*** – 0.24** scales analytical p = 0.0009 p = 0.021 WM – – 0.31*** 0.22** span p = 0.0002 p = 0.033 Personality Need for – – 0.16* 0.11 scales cognition p = 0.061 p = 0.29 Procrastination – – 0.075 0.021 p = 0.39 p = 0.84 Premeditation – – −0.094 −0.12 p = 0.28 p = 0.26 Sensation-seeking – – 0.19** 0.14 p = 0.031 p = 0.19 Perseverance – – – −0.13 p = 0.23 Urgency – – – −0.060 p = 0.57 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate significance at α = 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 365 the form of the nonparametric Spearman (rank) correlation. In all sample poolings, women perform significantly worse than men, but this significance vanishes in most of our multivariate analyses (to come shortly). Under the broadest pooling contain- ing most of the personality scales (the second, third and fourth samples), need for cognition and sensation-seeking are significantly related to performance. The posi- tive relationship between need for cognition and performance is expected if intrinsic motivation contributes to performance. However, the positive correlation of perfor- mance with sensation-seeking is not the expected one if sensation-seeking contributes to impulsiveness and impulsiveness is a negative influence on saving performance. Note, however, that these significant correlations vanish in the third and fourth sam- ples alone. Moreover, neither need for cognition nor sensation-seeking are significant in the multivariate analyses that follow. Finally, the cognitive scales (the analytical part of the Beta III, and WM span) are significant in every pooling where they are available. As will be clear shortly, this significance survives in multivariate analyses, somewhat shifting the burden of proof to those who would maintain that cognitive ability differences are merely instruments for some other difference.30 Table 4 shows Spearman correlations between performance and cognitive ability, broken down by the income stream difficulty treatment. The relationship between Table 4 Spearman rank correlations between average performance levels and cognitive measures, by income stream difficulty Income stream Cognitive Samples Samples Samples difficulty scale 1, 3 & 4 2, 3 & 4 3 & 4 Subjects = 139 Subjects = 135 Subjects = 91 Easy Beta III 0.20* – 0.25* PF(Y ) ≈ 0.73 analytical p = 0.053 p = 0.053 WM – 0.36*** 0.30** span p = 0.0004 p = 0.018 Moderate Beta III 0.22*** – 0.20*** PF(Y ) ≈ 0.585 analytical p < .0001 p = 0.0021 WM – 0.27*** 0.17*** span p < .0001 p = 0.0065 Hard Beta III 0.32*** – 0.15 PF(Y ) ≈ 0.475 analytical p = 0.0020 p = 0.26 WM – 0.24** 0.16 span p = 0.025 p = 0.21 Notes: *, **, and *** indicate significance at α = 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively 30As noted earlier, income stream difficulty in rounds 3 and 4 varies across subjects, so this is an experi- mentally induced part of the total variance of P s . However, a similar bivariate analysis in which income stream difficulty effects are first partialled out of P s is essentially identical in all respects to what we discuss here. 366 T.P. Ballinger et al. cognitive ability and performance seems robust across the samples only for easy and moderate difficulty income streams. For the hard income streams, the positive rela- tionship observed elsewhere in this table is not significant in the 3rd and 4th samples (though it is in broader poolings). Camerer and Hogarth (1999) view cognitive capital as procedural knowledge and suggest that particularly hard problems may challenge the knowledge of even the most able subjects. This may be why variations in our subjects’ cognitive abilities robustly explain variations in performance with easy and moderate income streams, but not so robustly with the hard income streams. We now turn to multivariate analyses. For this purpose, we treat the experimental data as a panel with four repeated measurements of performance (in each of rounds 2 through 5). We use a random effects estimator to account for any reliable between- subject variance of performance levels that remains after controlling for observed dif- ferences between the subjects (demographic, cognitive and personality differences) and treatment variation within and between subjects (the difficulty of, and total in- come in, the current income stream and the previous income stream). Besides ac- counting for the lack of independence between the repeated measurements on each subject, this also allows us to say how much of the potentially predictable variance in performance is explained by the various measures, treatments and learning. All stan- dard errors and tests are computed using the heteroscedasticity-robust “sandwich” es- timator.31 Degrees of freedom are adjusted downward for tests concerning all effects that vary strictly between subjects, such as demographic, cognitive and personality measures. Table 5 shows most of the results of the panel analyses. The parameterization of the model and linear transformations of its regressors make the intercept interpretable as the mean round 2 performance of the average male subject at the rural campus, when facing a moderate difficulty income stream with total income of 60.32 Recall that the forecast performance for such income streams, on the basis of previous work (Ballinger et al. 2003), is about 0.585: The estimated intercepts are very close to this. This is remarkable since this experiment differs from that of Ballinger, Palumbo and Wilcox in several ways: (a) subject population; (b) motivational mechanism; (c) util- ity function; (d) length of the saving game; and (e) a very different software interface and instructional protocol. In spite of these differences, the one-parameter “apparent horizon” model with τ = 3, estimated on the basis of the earlier experiment, predicts mean inexperienced (second round) subject performance in this new experiment quite well. We also used a motivational scheme in which subjects do not learn the “good score” and “poor score” until each round concludes, so that marginal incentives are uncertain during play. This does not seem to have a deleterious effect on behavior and performance. 31We find no evidence of significant autocorrelation of the residuals from these models. There is some weak evidence of heteroscedasticity conditioned on the cognitive ability measures though (as one might expect, lower variance with higher cognitive ability), so the precaution of the sandwich estimator seems appropriate. 32Specifically, variables are transformed in the following ways. Performance forecasts PF (higher means an “easier” income stream) are differenced from 0.585—the approximate difficulty of all moderate diffi- culty income streams. Total income ∑ Y is differenced from 60, its average sample value; and age, and all cognitive and personality scales, are standardized using the sample mean and sample standard deviation calculated within each pooling of samples. Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 367 Table 5 Random effects panel regressions of performance P sr on trials, treatments and subject character- istics in various combinations of samples: estimates and significance tests Regressor Regressor All samples Samples 1, 3 & 4 Samples 2, 3 & 4 Samples 3 & 4 class Subjects = 183 Subjects = 139 Subjects = 135 Subjects = 91 Estimate Joint Estimate Joint Estimate Joint Estimate Joint (std. err.) tests (std. err.) tests (std. err.) tests (std. err.) tests Intercept Intercept 0.60*** – 0.56*** – 0.64*** – 0.61*** – (0.032) (0.039) (0.032) (0.045) Learning Round 3 0.0063 Yes 0.021 Yes −0.0039 Yes 0.014 Yes difference (0.018) (***) (0.021) (***) (0.020) (*) (0.025) (***) Round 4 0.055*** 0.083*** 0.037** 0.070*** difference (0.016) (0.019) (0.018) (0.022) Round 5 0.052*** 0.067*** 0.035** 0.052** difference (0.015) (0.018) (0.018) (0.023) Treatments (properties of current and once- lagged income streams) PF(Yr ) 0.38*** Yes 0.41*** Yes 0.35*** Yes 0.39*** Yes (***) (0.086) (***) (0.097) (***) (0.097) (***) (0.11) (**) PF(Yr−1) 0.014 0.030 −0.0065 0.0060 (0.065) (0.076) (0.074) (0.093) ∑ Yr 0.000029 −0.00046 0.00036 −0.00019 (0.00082) (0.00093) (0.00092) (0.0011) ∑ Yr−1 0.00079 0.00099 0.00092 0.0013 (0.00075) (0.00083) (0.00092) (0.0011) Demo- graphic variables Female −0.053 No −0.037 No −0.081∗∗ No −0.077 No (0.033) (0.036) (0.039) (0.050) Age 0.014 −0.016 0.018 −0.0052 (0.014) (0.012) (0.016) (0.015) Urban 0.024 0.047 0.0049 0.033 campus (0.033) (0.037) (0.044) (0.052) Cognitive scales Beta III – – 0.075*** – – – 0.052** analytical (0.018) (0.021) Yes WM – – 0.079*** 0.045** (***) span (0.017) (0.020) Moreover, the performance forecast PF(Yr) is a highly significant predictor of performance, indicating that our scheme for rating income stream difficulty has some aggregate value. Still, if the performance forecast was an unbiased predictor, its co- efficient would be unity; and this hypothesis is easily rejected. We believe this occurs (in part) because the performance forecast assumes a common τ = 3 apparent hori- zon model for all subjects. As a result, its predictive value is probably attenuated by policy heterogeneity across subjects. 368 T.P. Ballinger et al. Table 5 (Continued) Regressor Regressor All samples Samples 1, 3 & 4 Samples 2, 3 & 4 Samples 3 & 4 class Subjects = 183 Subjects = 139 Subjects = 135 Subjects = 91 Estimate Joint Estimate Joint Estimate Joint Estimate Joint (std. err.) tests (std. err.) tests (std. err.) tests (std. err.) tests Personality Need for – – – – 0.026 No 0.0082 No scales cognition (0.016) (0.021) Procras- – – 0.025 −0.0063 tination (0.019) (0.027) Premed- – – −0.0031 −0.0016 itation (0.022) (0.028) Sensation- – – 0.028 0.011 seeking (0.023) (0.029) Perseverance – – – −0.040∗ (0.023) Urgency – – – −0.020 (0.023) Notes: *, **, and *** indicate significance at α = 10%,5% and 1%, respectively When a subject completes a saving game round with a relatively hard income stream (or one with relatively low total income), it is possible that he learns more from that experience, or otherwise exercises more caution, in the next round than does a subject who faced a relatively easy income stream (or relatively high total income). Yet we find no evidence of this. Once-lagged performance forecasts PF(Yr−1) and total incomes ∑ Yr−1 are insignificant in all regressions. Put differently, there is no evidence that performance depends on treatment history (order effects). Finally, as we hoped would be true given the way we measure performance, current round total income ∑ Yr has no significant effect on current round performance either. The significant gender effect in the bivariate analyses vanishes in the multivariate analysis and, as a group, the demographic variables (gender, age and site) are jointly insignificant. We note that this is not because women and men in these samples differ systematically in their measured cognitive abilities: There is no significant difference in the WM span or Beta III scores of women and men in any pooling of the sam- ples. Additionally, as mentioned earlier, the significance of personality scales mostly vanishes in the multivariate analysis. While perseverance is marginally significant in the third and fourth samples where it is measured, its negative sign is the opposite of what one would expect if perseverance inhibits impulsiveness and impulsiveness is a negative influence on saving performance. Finally, it is very clear that, wherever they are found, the cognitive measures are highly significant predictors of performance. Even in the small pooling (just the third and fourth samples) where both measures are available and hence in the regression together, they are both individually significant (and so not mutually redundant, even though positively correlated). Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 369 In terms of explained variance, the Beta III and WM span alone explain about 19% of the potentially predictable between-subjects variance (estimated as the variance of random effects in the model with no demographic, cognitive or personality measures). This is not as large as one might like, but it is by no means trivial: Their significance is practical as well as statistical. 2.3 Policy quality and policy consistency Policy quality is the natural logarithm ln(τ̂ sr ) of the nonlinear least squares estimate τ̂ sr , the estimated horizon of optimization of subject s in round r; while policy con- sistency is the negative of the root mean squared error −rmsesr from these nonlinear least squares regressions. Table 6 shows the results of panel regressions (identical in all respects to those performed for Table 5) of these two dependent measures, using just the data from the third and fourth samples. The first column of Table 6 simply re- peats the last column of Table 5, so that the panel regressions of performance, policy quality and policy consistency may be compared with ease. There are two interesting findings in Table 6. The first concerns learning. Recall that there is strongly significant evidence of learning (though the effect is small) in that performance rises significantly between the second and fifth rounds. This does not appear to be because subjects are learning a better policy: The center column of Table 6 shows no evidence of a significant rise in apparent horizons of optimization across rounds. Instead, subjects learn to apply a roughly unchanging policy more con- sistently: The right column of Table 6 shows that policy consistency improves signif- icantly across rounds. In this experiment, performance improvements across rounds are mostly due to a reduction of noise rather than the improvement of structural pol- icy quality. The second interesting finding is that the two cognitive ability measures appear to explain different sources of cross-sectional variation in performance. Work- ing memory span significantly explains variations in policy quality but not policy consistency. The reverse is true for the analytical components of the Beta III, which significantly explain cross-sectional variations in policy consistency but not policy quality. 3 Discussion and conclusions Cognitive abilities are the best predictors of saving performance in our game. This agrees with the evidence reviewed by Stanovich and West (2000), showing that sub- stantial variance of most (though not all) classic experimental failures of reasoning are explained by measures of cognitive abilities. It also agrees with recent sugges- tive results of Rydval and Ortmann (2004), Frederick (2005) and Benjamin et al. (2006). Multivariate controls for sex, age, experimental site and various personality scales (intrinsic motivation, procrastination and impulsiveness) do not eliminate the significance of cognitive abilities. The computational complexity of saving problems, interacting with heterogeneous cognitive constraints of savers, is a likely determinant of differences in saving behavior across individuals. On a more general note, measures of cognitive abilities are likely to find many uses in experiments. We discuss WM span since we are relatively familiar with it and 370 T.P. Ballinger et al. Table 6 Random effects panel regressions of apparent horizons and policy consistency on trials, treat- ments and subject characteristics in validation samples (samples 3 and 4): estimates and significance tests Dependent variable → Performance Policy quality, Policy consistency, P sr ln(τ̂ s r ) −rmsesr Regressor Regressor Estimate Joint Estimate Joint Estimate Joint class (std. err.) tests (std. err.) tests (std. err.) tests Intercept Intercept 0.61*** – 1.38 – −1.19∗∗∗ – (0.045) (0.12) (0.077) Learning Round 3 0.014 Yes −0.041 No 0.085 Yes difference (0.025) (***) (0.067) (0.054) (***) Round 4 0.070*** −0.026 0.18*** difference (0.022) (0.067) (0.050) Round 5 0.052** −0.082 0.17*** difference (0.023) (0.069) (0.052) Treatments (properties of current and once- lagged income streams) PF(Yr ) 0.39*** Yes −0.63∗ Yes 0.057 No (0.11) (**) (0.33) (***) (0.26) PF(Yr−1) 0.0060 −0.032 −0.12 (0.093) (0.27) (0.19) ∑ Yr −0.00019 0.0099*** −0.0025 (0.0011) (0.0025) (0.0020) ∑ Yr−1 0.0013 0.00014 0.0015 (0.0011) (0.0024) (0.0024) Demographic variables Female −0.077 No −0.18 No −0.050 No (0.050) (0.12) (0.065) Age −0.0052 −0.036 0.020 (0.015) (0.039) (0.023) Urban campus 0.033 −0.0082 0.089 (0.052) (0.13) (0.067) Cognitive scales Beta III 0.052** Yes 0.054 Yes 0.074*** Yes analytical (0.021) (***) (0.056) (**) (0.026) (***) WM 0.045** 0.11** 0.015 span (0.020) (0.052) (0.025) because of its ubiquity in contemporary psychological research on cognitive func- tioning. Some argue that WM span taps a domain-general capacity for controlled at- tention (Kane et al. 2004). Psychologists use managerial metaphors when discussing it, speaking of its “supervisory” or “executive” functions (Engle 2002): It predicts in- Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 371 Table 6 (Continued) Dependent variable → Performance Policy quality, Policy consistency, P sr ln(τ̂ s r ) −rmsesr Regressor Regressor Estimate Joint Estimate Joint Estimate Joint class (std. err.) tests (std. err.) tests (std. err.) tests Personality scales Need for cognition 0.0082 No −0.0025 No 0.0028 No (0.021) (0.012) (0.0040) Procrastination −0.0063 −0.00056 −0.00061 (0.027) (0.013) (0.0073) Premeditation −0.0016 0.0055 −0.0094 (0.028) (0.015) (0.0072) Sensation-seeking 0.011 0.0017 −0.0026 (0.029) (0.0087) (0.0047) Perseverance −0.040∗ −0.010 −0.0032 (0.023) (0.016) (0.0083) Urgency −0.020 −0.0091 0.0018 (0.023) (0.012) (0.0071) Notes: *, **, and *** indicate significance at α = 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively telligent performance and problem-solving ability. Shah and Miyake (1999) remark that much complex cognition “involve[s] multiple steps with intermediate results that need to be kept in mind temporarily to accomplish the task at hand successfully” and identify the capacity to handle this, while processing information, as working memory. Seen in this manner, decision performance may be mediated in basic and deep ways by working memory capacity. For instance, the apparent failure of asset integra- tion (Kahneman and Tversky 1979), an important normative requirement in dynamic decisions under risk, might be mediated by working memory, since asset integration (and generally, normatively desirable “broad decision bracketing” of all kinds) re- quires simultaneous attention to outcomes of old decisions and features of current and future ones (Read et al. 1999). WM capacity might predict depth of reason- ing in k-step reasoning and cognitive hierarchy theories of game play (Nagel 1995; Stahl and Wilson 1995; Camerer et al. 2004). In fact, WM capacity might interact with game complexity to predict how individual subjects change their depth of rea- soning across games with increasingly complex structural features. WM capacity helps us ignore distractions and focus on what is important. Because of this, WM span may play a mediating role between effortful, conscious processes and automatic processes in “dual process” theories of the mind (Feldman-Barrett et al. 2004). For behavioral theorists who stress the role of outputs of automatic processes, such as immediate affective reactions to alternatives and events, differ- ences in WM span may therefore be important in determining their ultimate impact on behavior. For instance, consider immediate emotional reactions to “unfair” ac- 372 T.P. Ballinger et al. tions in some repeated game with random rematching to new partners in each period. It might be sensible to inhibit the force of those emotions on immediate future ac- tions since (due to rematching) the subject is about to meet a new partner. “Low spans” may find this more difficult than “high spans” if their more severe attention resource constraints make it more difficult to inhibit emotional reactions. WM capac- ity might mediate the frequency of retaliatory actions (as well as other actions based on automatic emotional responses) in games. The discussion above is meant to be illustrative rather than exhaustive. There are many phenomena of interest to behavioral and experimental economists that may be mediated in an important way by executive control of attention. If so, WM span measures could be an extremely useful “cognitive capital” measure for research in those areas. We believe the present study illustrates its promise. Appendix: Estimation of apparent horizons of optimization and policy consistency The nonlinear least squares estimation of horizons of optimization is taken from Ballinger et al. (2003). Let Y srt = {ysr1, ysr2, . . . , ysrt },Xsrt and csrt denote the actual income history, observed cash-in-hand and consumption choice (respectively) of sub- ject s in period t of round r . We use computational methods (Deaton 1992) to find cop(Xp, τ), the optimal policy for problem 2, for all τ ≤ 20. Let Xort (Y srt , τ ) be the cash-in-hand that policy cop(Xp, τ) holds in period t , given that it is applied to the income sequence Y srt with p = max{1, t + τ − 20}. Then the nonlinear least squares estimator of τ̂ sr , the subject’s “apparent horizon (of optimization) in round r ,” is τ̂ sr ≡ arg min τ∈{1,2,...,20} ( T∑ t=1 [esrt (τ )]2 )/ 20 where esrt (τ ) = csrt − cop[Xort (Y srt , τ )] and p = max{1, t + τ − 20}. Then, rmsesr is simply the square root of the value of this objective function evaluated at τ̂ sr . To estimate apparent horizons τ̂ s (assuming a constant policy across rounds 2 to 5, that is no learning across rounds), the sum in the minimand is taken across all four rounds and divided by 80 rather than 20: rmses is the square root of the value of this objective function evaluated at τ̂ s . The shifted period index p = max{1, t + τ − 20} of the policy function in the minimization accounts for the fact that policy functions with τ < 20 are “myopic.” For instance, with τ = 3, the policy function behaves as if it is always beginning a three-period game (p = 1) for all true game periods t = 1 to 17. Thereafter, in true periods t = 18, 19 and 20, p is 1, 2 and 3 (respectively): The myopic policy function with τ = 3 is only truly optimal in these last periods of the true game. References Ballinger, T. P., Palumbo, M. G., & Wilcox, N. T. (2003). Precautionary saving and social learning across generations: An experiment. Economic Journal, 113, 920–947. Saving behavior and cognitive abilities 373 Beach, L. R., & Mitchell, T. R. (1978). A contingency model for the selection of decision strategies. Academy of Management Review, 3, 439–449. Benjamin, D. J., Brown, S. A., & Shapiro, J. M. (2006). Who is “behavioral”? Cognitive ability and anomalous preferences. Harvard University working paper. Brown, A. L., Chua, Z. E., & Camerer, C. F. (2009). Learning and visceral temptation in dynamic saving experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 197–231. Browning, M., & Lusardi, A. (1996). Household saving: Micro theories and micro facts. Journal of Eco- nomic Literature, 34, 1797–1855. Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., Feinstein, J. A., & Jarvis, W. B. G. (1996). Dispositional differences in cognitive motivation: the life and times of individuals varying in need for cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 119(2), 197–253. Camerer, C. F., & Hogarth, R. M. (1999). The effects of financial incentives in experiments: a review and capital-labor-production framework. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 19(1–3), 7–42. Camerer, C. F., Ho, T.-H., & Chong, K. (2004). A cognitive hierarchy model of behavior in games. Quar- terly Journal of Economics, 119(3), 861–898. Campbell, J. Y., & Mankiw, N. G. (1990). Permanent income, current income and consumption. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 8, 265–279. Carbone, E. (2006). Understanding intertemporal choices. Applied Economics, 38, 889–898. Carbone, E., & Hey, J. D. (2004). The effect of unemployment on consumption: an experimental analysis. Economic Journal, 114, 660–683. Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: a survey of factor-analytic studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Conlisk, J. (1980). Costly optimization versus cheap imitators. Journal of Economic Behavior and Orga- nization, 1, 275–293. Conlisk, J. (1996). Why bounded rationality? Journal of Economic Literature, 34, 669–700. Conway, A. R. A., Kane, M. J., Bunting, M. F., Hambrick, D. Z., Wilhelm, O., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working memory span tasks: a methodological review and user’s guide. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 12, 769–786. Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika, 16, 297–334. Deaton, A. S. (1992). Understanding consumption. London: Oxford University Press. Dyer, D., & Kagel, J. H. (1996). Bidding in common value auctions: how the commercial construction industry corrects for the winner’s curse. Management Science, 42, 1463–1475. Engle, R. W. (2002). Working memory capacity as executive attention. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 19–23. Engle, R. W., & Kane, M. J. (2004). Executive attention, working memory capacity, and a two-factor theory of cognitive control. In B. Ross (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 44, pp. 145–199). Amsterdam: Elsevier. Engle, R. W., Tuholski, S. W., Laughlin, J. E., & Conway, A. R. A. (1999). Working memory, short- term memory, and general fluid intelligence: a latent variable approach. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 309–331. Feldman-Barrett, L., Tugade, M. M., & Engle, R. W. (2004). Individual differences in working memory capacity and dual-process theories of the mind. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 553–573. Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 25–42. Gabaix, X., & Laibson, D. (2000). A boundedly rational decision algorithm. American Economic Review, 90, 433–438. Hall, R. E., & Mishkin, F. S. (1982). The sensitivity of consumption to transitory income: estimates from panel data on households. Econometrica, 50, 461–481. Harrison, G. (1989). Theory and misbehavior of first-price auctions. American Economic Review, 79, 749– 762. Harrison, G., & List, J. A. (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature, 42(4), 1009–1055. Hey, J., & Dardanoni, V. (1988). Optimal consumption under uncertainty: an experimental investigation. Economic Journal, 98(390), 105–116 (supplement). Hogarth, R. (1975). Decision time as a function of task complexity. In D. Wendt & C. Vlek (Eds.), Utility, probability and human decision making (pp. 321–338). Dordrecht: Reidel. Hunt, E. (1999). Intelligence and human resources: past, present and future. In P. L. Ackerman, P. Kyl- lunon, & R. Roberts (Eds.), Learning and individual differences: process, trait and content determi- nants (pp. 3–30). Washington: American Psychological Association. 374 T.P. Ballinger et al. Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263–291. Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2002). The role of prefrontal cortex in working-memory capacity, executive attention, and general fluid intelligence: an individual-differences perspective. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9, 637–671. Kane, M. J., Hambrick, D. Z., Tuholski, S. W., Wilhelm, O., Payne, T. W., & Engle, R. W. (2004). The gen- erality of working-memory capacity: a latent-variable approach to verbal and visuo-spatial memory span and reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133(2), 189–217. Kellogg, C. E., & Morton, N. W. (1999). Beta III manual. San Antonio: The Psychological Corporation. McDaniel, T. M., & Rutström, E. E. (2001). Decision making costs and problem solving performance. Experimental Economics, 4, 145–161. Millner, E., & Pratt, M. (1992). A test of risk inducement: is inducement of risk-neutrality neutral? Virginia Commonwealth University Department of Economics working paper. Nagel, R. (1995). Unraveling in guessing games: an experimental study. American Economic Review, 85(5), 1313–1326. Nisbett, R. E., & Ross, L. D. (1980). Human inference: strategies and shortcomings of social judgment. Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs. Payne, J., Bettman, J., & Johnson, E. (1988). Adaptive strategy selection in decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 14, 534–552. Porteus, S. D. (1965). Porteus maze tests: fifty years’ application. Palo Alto: Pacific Book Publishers. Raven, J., Raven, J. C., & Court, J. H. (1998). Manual for Raven’s progressive matrices and vocabulary scales. San Antonio: The Psychological Corporation. Read, D., Loewenstein, G., & Rabin, M. (1999). Choice bracketing. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 19, 171–197. Russo, J. E. (1978). Comments on behavioral and economic approaches to studying market behavior. In A. A. Mitchell (Ed.), The effect of information on consumer and market behavior (pp. 65–74). Chicago: American Marketing Association. Rydval, O., & Ortmann, A. (2004). How financial incentives and cognitive abilities affect task performance in laboratory settings: an illustration. Economics Letters, 85(3), 315–320. Spearman, C. (1904). “General intelligence” objectively determined and measured. American Journal of Psychology, 15, 201–293. Selten, R., Sadrieh, A., & Abbink, K. (1999). Money does not induce risk neutral behavior, but binary lotteries do even worse. Theory and Decision, 46, 211–249. Shah, P., & Miyake, A. (1996). The separability of working memory resources for spatial thinking and lan- guage processing: an individual differences approach. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 125, 4–27. Shah, P., & Miyake, A. (1999). Models of working memory: an introduction. In A. Miyake & P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory: mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control (pp. 1–26). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Smith, V. L. (1982). Microeconomic systems as an experimental science. American Economic Review, 72, 923–955. Stahl, D., & Wilson, P. (1995). On player’s models of other players: theory and experimental evidence. Games and Economic Behavior, 7, 218–254. Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual differences in reasoning: implications for the rationality debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645–665. Thaler, R. H. (1994). Psychology and savings policies. American Economic Review, 84, 186–192. Tuckman, B. W. (1991). The development and concurrent validity of the procrastination scale. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 51, 473–480. Turley-Ames, K. J., & Whitfield, M. M. (2003). Strategy training and working memory task performance. Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 446–468. Turner, M. L., & Engle, R. W. (1989). Is working memory capacity task-dependent? Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 127–154. Wilcox, N. (1993a). Lottery choice: incentives, complexity and decision time. Economic Journal, 103, 1397–1417. Wilcox, N. (1993b). On a lottery pricing anomaly: time tells the tale. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 7, 311–324. Whiteside, S. P., & Lynam, D. R. (2001). The five factor model and impulsivity: using a structural model of personality to understand impulsivity. Personality and Individual Differences, 30, 669–689. Winkler, R. L., & Murphy, A. M. (1973). Experiments in the laboratory and the real world. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 20, 252–270.