brinkmann2008.pdf
ahJo7wuImHesLMpxu.5xg4Bdzrha-brinkmann2008.pdf.plain.html

Does Depression Interfere With Effort Mobilization? Effects of Dysphoria and Task Difficulty on Cardiovascular Response Kerstin Brinkmann and Guido H. E. Gendolla University of Geneva On the basis of predictions of the mood-behavior model (G. H. E. Gendolla, 2000) and motivational intensity theory (J. W. Brehm & E. A. Self, 1989), the authors conducted 2 studies that critically tested the common assumption that dysphoria is associated with a motivational deficit. Dysphoric and non- dysphoric undergraduates performed a cognitive task that was either easy or difficult. Effort intensity (i.e., resource mobilization) was assessed as performance-related cardiovascular reactivity. In support of the authors’ predictions and in contrast to the popular view of a general motivational deficit, both studies found a crossover interaction between dysphoria and task difficulty: In the difficult condition, nondys- phoric participants indeed showed stronger systolic blood pressure reactivity than dysphoric participants. But in the easy condition, dysphoric participants showed stronger systolic reactivity than nondysphoric participants. The findings are discussed with respect to motivational deficits in depression and possible underlying mechanisms. Keywords: dysphoria, depression, motivational deficit, effort mobilization, cardiovascular reactivity Dysphoria and depression are said to affect motivation (e.g., Heckhausen, 1991)—a lack in motivation is even a diagnostic criterion of major depressive disorder as defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed.; American Psychiatric Association [APA], 1994). Thus, it is not surprising that researchers have already investigated various aspects of the depression–motivation link—among others, effects on behavioral approach and inhibition (Gray, 1982), self-regulation (e.g., Strau- man, 2002), and action-relevant information processing (e.g., Her- tel, 2000; Scott & Ingram, 1998). However, little is known about dysphoria effects on effort intensity (i.e., the mobilization of resources for attaining goals). On the basis of the assumption that a central characteristic of dysphoria is a persisting negative mood (APA, 1994; see also Mineka, Watson, & Clark, 1998) and on predictions of the mood- behavior model (MBM; Gendolla, 2000) and motivational inten- sity theory (Brehm & Self, 1989), we conducted research that has shown that dysphoria directly influences resource mobilization in terms of cardiovascular reactivity for cognitive tasks. But in con- trast to the popular view that dysphoria is associated with a general motivational deficit, dysphoric individuals mobilized more effort than nondysphorics under “do-your-best” instructions (Brinkmann & Gendolla, 2007). This suggests that there is in fact no general motivational deficit but rather that dysphorics mobilize more effort than nondysphorics. However, given that those studies used tasks without fixed performance standards, it remained open if this effect was a general one or if it was restricted to the specific performance condition asking to “do one’s best.” To come to clearer conclu- sions, we investigated dysphoric and nondysphoric individuals’ resource mobilization during the performance of tasks with fixed difficulty levels. On the basis of the MBM (Gendolla, 2000) and previous research on mood effects on effort mobilization (see Gendolla & Brinkmann, 2005; Richter, Gendolla, & Krüsken, 2006, for reviews), we guided our studies by the idea that dyspho- ric individuals would mobilize less effort only in the context of difficult tasks but that they would mobilize even more effort than nondysphorics in the context of easy tasks. As in our previous studies, effort mobilization was quantified as the reactivity of the cardiovascular system during task performance (Gendolla & Brinkmann, 2005; R. A. Wright, 1996). Dysphoria, Self-Regulation, and Motivation Several researchers have stressed that self-regulation and moti- vation play important roles in the development, manifestation, and change of depression and dysphoria. A number of the identified cognitive deficits of depressed individuals (see e.g., Burt, Zembar, & Niederehe, 1995; Rogers et al., 2004, for reviews) might in fact be caused by motivational deficits (e.g., Abramson, Alloy, & Rosoff, 1981). Likewise, there is evidence that aspects of self- regulation problems, such as rumination (Hertel, 2000; Watkins & Brown, 2002), maintenance of unrealistic intentions (Kuhl & Helle, 1986), and deficits in attention control (Hertel, 2000; Hertel & Gerstle, 2003), play an important role in the relation of depres- sion or dysphoria and cognitive malfunctioning. In addition, the Kerstin Brinkmann and Guido H. E. Gendolla, Department of Psychol- ogy, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. Parts of the present research were presented at the 45th Congress of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Psychologie, Nuremberg, Germany, September 17–21, 2006. This research was facilitated by Deutsche Forschungsge- meinschaft Grant Ge 987/7-1 awarded to Guido H. E. Gendolla. We are grateful to Michael Richter for his helpful comments on a draft of this article and to Sandrine Oliveira who conducted the studies presented here as hired experimenter. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Kerstin Brinkmann, University of Geneva, FPSE, Department of Psychology, 40, Bd. du Pont d’Arve, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. E-mail: kerstin.brinkmann@pse.unige.ch Journal of Personality and Social Psychology Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 2008, Vol. 94, No. 1, 146–157 0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.1.146 146 Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . motivational implications of negative feedback have a detrimental effect on subsequent performance. This effect has been shown to be especially pronounced in depression, compared to control groups as well as other clinical groups (Elliott, Sahakian, Herrod, Robbins, & Paykel, 1997). With respect to the concept of approach and avoidance motiva- tion, Strauman (2002) emphasized that depression is a disorder of self-regulation, which leads to affective and motivational deficits. In further support of their diminished approach motivation, de- pressed individuals have been shown to be less responsive to rewards (e.g., Henriques & Davidson, 2000) and have been char- acterized by a relative hypoactivation of the left prefrontal cor- tex—an area involved in approach-related behaviors (e.g., David- son, Pizzagalli, Nitschke, & Putnam, 2002). Thus, it seems to be clear that dysphoria and depression are associated with impair- ments of a number of motivational and self-regulation functions. Whether depression is also linked to impairments in the mobiliza- tion of energy resources is less clear. Carroll, Phillips, Hunt, and Der (2007) found weak negative associations between depression and cardiovascular reactivity. However, from our perspective, a shortcoming of this study is the fact that task characteristics were not considered. Effort Intensity and Cardiovascular Reactivity Motivational intensity theory (Brehm & Self, 1989) has elabo- rated the “difficulty law of motivation” (Ach, 1935). Motivational intensity theory states that individuals mobilize resources propor- tionately to experienced task difficulty as long as success is pos- sible and worthwhile. Consequently, fewer resources should be mobilized for an easy task than for a difficult task when the maximally justified effort is high. Disengagement occurs when task difficulty exceeds a person’s ability or when the necessary effort is not justified by the value of success. R. A. Wright (1996) has integrated motivational intensity theory with Obrist’s (1981) active coping approach to cardiovascular arousal. Research instigated on the basis of this perspective has consistently shown that resource mobilization can be reliably quantified by cardiovascular reactivity—changes in the activity of the cardiovascular system—in the context of task performance (see R. A. Wright & Kirby, 2001, for a review). Most significantly, performance-related changes in systolic blood pressure (SBP) fol- low the effort pattern predicted by motivational intensity theory, taking into consideration varying degrees of task difficulty and value of success (e.g., Bongard, 1995; Gendolla & Krüsken, 2002b; Light, Dolan, Davis, & Sherwood, 1992; Richter & Gen- dolla, 2006; Smith, Nealey, Kircher, & Limon, 1997). Evidence for changes in diastolic blood pressure (DBP) and heart rate (HR) also exists but is less consistent (e.g., Storey, Wright, & Williams, 1996). The high sensitivity of SBP to respond to resource mobi- lization is not surprising because SBP is systematically influenced by the sympathetic nervous system via myocardial contractility. By contrast, DBP mainly depends on flow resistance in the vas- culature, which is only unsystematically influenced by sympathetic discharge. HR is influenced by both the sympathetic and the parasympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system and should thus respond to resource mobilization only to the extent that sympathetic influences dominate (see Brownley, Hurwitz, & Schneiderman, 2000; Obrist, 1981; Papillo & Shapiro, 1990). Dysphoria, Mood, and Effort Intensity To come to clear predictions about dysphoria effects on effort intensity, we elaborate on the fact that an enduring negative mood is one of the core characteristics of depression (APA, 1994; Mineka et al., 1998) and that both mood states and depression can influence judgments in a mood congruent way (see Scott & In- gram, 1998; Wyer, Clore, & Isbell, 1999, for reviews). The result is that more negative and pessimistic judgments are made in a negative mood or by depressed individuals and more positive and optimistic judgments are made in a positive mood or by nonde- pressed individuals. According to the MBM (Gendolla, 2000), such mood congru- ency effects also occur on task-related appraisals during task performance, such as judgments of demand, difficulty, or ability. This results in higher perceived task demand in a negative mood than in a positive mood (e.g., Cunningham, 1988; Kavanagh & Bower, 1985; J. C. Wright & Mischel, 1982) and influences resource mobilization in compliance with the difficulty law of motivation (Ach, 1935). With reference to the effects of transient mood states, there is clear, replicated evidence that effort-related cardiovascular reactivity is stronger in a negative mood than in a positive mood when participants are asked to do their best and have to self-regulate the necessary resources (e.g., Gendolla, Abele, & Krüsken, 2001; Gendolla & Krüsken, 2002c; Silvestrini & Gendolla, 2007). Demand appraisals assessed immediately before performance— the best possible approximation for demand appraisals during performance—have been shown to mediate the effect of mood on cardiovascular response (Gendolla & Krüsken, 2002c). This sup- ports the idea of an informational mood impact (i.e., that momen- tary mood functions as information for perceived task demand). Furthermore, the mood effects on both demand appraisals and cardiovascular reactivity disappear when mood’s informative value is called into question (Gendolla & Krüsken, 2002a). When individuals face challenges with fixed performance stan- dards, mood effects on effort-related cardiovascular response are moderated by task difficulty. This happens because people avoid wasting energy and consequently consider all available task- relevant information simultaneously in a pragmatic way when they make demand appraisals. Consequently, for an easy task, a nega- tive mood leads to higher effort (relatively high subjective de- mand) than a positive mood (relatively low demand). By contrast, for a difficult task, a positive mood leads to higher effort (high, but still possible demand), but a negative mood leads to lower effort (disengagement because of too high demand; Gendolla & Krüsken, 2002b). Research within the same paradigm has shown, further- more, that ability perception (R. A. Wright & Dill, 1993; R. A. Wright, Murray, Storey, & Williams, 1997) and dispositional optimism (Kirby, Vaga, Penacerrada, & Wright, 2003, cited in R. A. Wright & Franklin, 2004)—another dispositional variable that is associated with mood differences (Scheier & Carver, 1992)—combine with task difficulty to determine effort-related cardiovascular reactivity. Whether depression and dysphoria have the same effects is an open question. From the perspective that depression and dysphoria are charac- terized by, among other symptoms, a persistent negative mood, we posit that dysphoria influences the mobilization of resources via an informational mood impact, as specified in the MBM (Gendolla, 147DYSPHORIA AND EFFORT MOBILIZATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . 2000). Consequently, we do not assume that dysphoria is associ- ated with a general deficit in effort intensity. Rather, compared to nondysphorics, dysphoric individuals should mobilize even more resources for an easy task but fewer resources for a difficult task. This effect should occur because of higher subjective demand during performance of an easy task and the experience of too high demand during performance of a difficult task in dysphoria. The Present Studies In two quasi-experimental studies, we confronted dysphoric and nondysphoric individuals with tasks of fixed low versus high difficulty levels. If dysphoria is associated with a general motiva- tional deficit, then dysphorics should mobilize fewer resources than nondysphorics on both difficulty levels. However, if our reasoning that the motivational effects of dysphoria are the result of an informational mood impact is correct, then task difficulty should moderate dysphoria effects on effort intensity. This should occur because the level of subjectively experienced demand during task performance depends on the joint effect of the two accessible types of information—mood and performance standard (e.g., Gen- dolla & Krüsken, 2002b). The resulting pattern of effort intensity is depicted in Figure 1. Specifically, we predict a crossover interaction effect of dys- phoria and task difficulty on effort-related cardiovascular re- sponse. In the context of an easy task, dysphoric individuals should show stronger cardiovascular reactivity, especially SBP (see above), than nondysphoric individuals do. In the context of a difficult (but still possible) task, nondysphoric individuals should show stronger SBP reactivity than the dysphoric group. In order to be able to generalize our predicted crossover interaction pattern, we conducted two studies, each with a different type of cognitive challenge—a mental concentration task and a memory task. Study 1: Mental Concentration Task Participants were randomly assigned to the conditions of a 2 (dysphoric vs. nondysphoric)  2 (task: easy vs. difficult) between-persons design, respecting the restriction of approxi- mately equal cell distributions for dysphoric and nondysphoric participants as well as for men and women. Cardiovascular activity was assessed during a habituation period and during performance of the mental concentration task. Method Participants One-hundred eighty-seven university students from an introduc- tory psychology course participated in questionnaire sessions con- taining various personality questionnaires. By means of their scores on the Center for Epidemiologic Studies––Depression Scale (CES-D; Radloff, 1977), a self-report depression scale, we ran- domly selected students who scored in the lower and the upper quartile of the distributions of men and women (i.e., 6 or 20 for men and 13 or 20 for women) and invited them via an anonymous code to participate in an ostensibly unrelated experi- ment in exchange for course credit. The CES-D was assessed a second time in the context of the experimental session, and only students whose scores stayed within the limits set by the initial distribution were retained (see Ingram & Siegle, 2002; Weary, Edwards, & Jacobson, 1995). Therefore, a total of 53 participants (45 women, 8 men; average age 20 years) constituted our final sample. Twenty-six individuals (4 men and 22 women) scored in the lower quartile of the CES-D (Time 1 [t1]: M  6.38, SE  0.54; Time 2 [t2]: M  6.31, SE  0.73) and were therefore referred to as nondysphoric. The remaining 27 students (4 men and 23 women) scored in the upper quartile of the CES-D (t1: M  30.41, SE  1.27; t2: M  30.00, SE  1.62) and were therefore referred to as dysphoric. Physiological Apparatus Blood pressure measures were obtained noninvasively with a computer-aided monitor (Par Electronics Physioport III-S, Berlin, Germany) that uses oscillometry to determine SBP (in millimeters of mercury) and DBP (in millimeters of mercury). A blood pres- sure cuff (Boso, Bosch  Sohn, Jungingen, Germany) was placed over the brachial arteria above the elbow of each participant’s nondominant arm and inflated automatically in 1-min intervals during two measurement periods—habituation (baseline) and task performance. Inter-beat intervals (IBIs) were assessed noninvasively using an electrocardiogram (ECG; Psylab System, Contact Precision Instru- ments, London, England) that continuously monitored the electri- cal activity of the heart muscle. Two Ag/AgCl 16 mm electrodes (Red Dot, 3M, Neuss, Germany) were placed on each participant: (a) one on the musculature between the neck and the distal end of the right collarbone, and (b) one on the left lateral abdomen below the lower rib cage (Lead II). Data were filtered using a 10 Hz high pass and a 40 Hz low pass filter and sampled at 500 Hz. The ECG signal was transferred to an internal R-wave detector (Psylab System, Contact Precision Instruments, London, England) that calculated IBIs. The beginning and end of the two measurement periods (habit- uation, task performance) were synchronized via Transistor– Transistor Logic signals sent by the experimental software (In- Figure 1. Theoretical predictions for the joint impact of dysphoria and fixed task difficulty on effort intensity. Adapted from “Mood, Task De- mand, and Effort-Related Cardiovascular Response,” by G. H. E. Gendolla and J. Krüsken, 2002, Cognition & Emotion, 16, p. 580. Copyright 2002 by Taylor & Francis. 148 BRINKMANN AND GENDOLLA Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . quisit 2.0, Millisecond Software, Seattle, WA) through a parallel port. The ECG signal was assessed continuously; blood pressure measures were taken in 1-min intervals starting 15 sec after the beginning of each measurement period. All obtained values were stored on computer disk so that both experimenter and participants were ignorant of all physiological values measured over the course of the experiment. Self-Report Data Dysphoria was assessed with two short self-report scales that have proven their applicability in depression research. They were administered once about 4 weeks prior to the experiment and a second time directly after the experimental session. The French version of the CES-D (Fuhrer & Rouillon, 1989) consists of 20 items asking for frequency of depressive symptom experience on scales from 0 (never, very seldom) to 3 (frequently, always) and has been developed for community samples. In addition to the CES-D, we administered the French version of the revised Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II; Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996)—a 21-item scale initially developed for clinical samples but fre- quently used in student samples as well. It asks for intensity of depressive experience during the past 2 weeks on scales from 0 (lowest intensity) to 3 (highest intensity). At both assessment times, the CES-D and the BDI-II showed high internal consistency (s  .92) and were highly correlated with one another, rs(53)  .84, ps  .001. At the beginning of the experimental session, the positive (i.e., “happy,” “joyful,” “contented,” “cheerful”) and the negative (i.e., “sad,” “frustrated,” “depressed,” “dissatisfied”) hedonic tone scales of the UWIST Mood Adjective Checklist (Matthews, Jones, & Chamberlain, 1990) assessed participants’ momentary mood. Participants indicated the extent to which each adjective reflected their momentary feeling state on 7-point Likert scales ranging from 1 (not at all) to 7 (very much). Procedure The experimental session, which took about 30 min, was com- puterized using a personal computer and experimental software (Inquisit 2.0) that presented all instructions and stimuli. Partici- pants attended individually. They were greeted by the experiment- er—who was hired and unaware of both the hypotheses and participants’ dysphoria groups—and took a seat in front of a computer monitor. After participants had read introductory infor- mation and given signed consent, the experimenter attached the blood pressure cuff and the electrodes, left the room, and moni- tored the experiment from an outside control room. Participants first answered biographical questions and indicated their momen- tary feeling state on the UWIST scale. This was followed by a 9-min habituation period to determine cardiovascular baseline values while participants read an old issue of a geographic mag- azine. After completion of the habituation period, the experimenter reentered the room, took the magazine, and asked participants to continue with the concentration task. Instructions explained that participants would work on a con- centration task for 5 min. Different stimuli would appear on the screen, preceded by a fixation cross (presented for 1,000 ms) and followed by a mask. As soon as the stimulus was erased by the mask, participants had to indicate within a 4,000-ms response time window whether the presented stimulus had been the letter “d” accompanied by exactly two apostrophes by pressing a “yes” or a “no” key on the keyboard. Distraction stimuli were the letter “d” with one, three, or four apostrophes and the letter “p” with one, two, three, or four apostrophes. Following each answer, partici- pants received feedback before the new trial began. Task difficulty of this adapted version of the Brickenkamp (1981) d2 mental concentration task was manipulated by the presentation time of the stimuli. In the easy condition, stimuli were presented for 1,000 ms, but in the difficult condition, stimuli were presented for 160 ms—long enough to perceive the stimuli but short enough to make it difficult, albeit not impossible, to detect the difference, as indicated by pretests. Task instructions were followed by 40 training trials to famil- iarize participants with the task and to give them an impression of task difficulty. Before starting the 5-min performance period, participants appraised task demand (i.e., perceived task difficulty, probability of success, and perceived own capacity) on 7-point scales ranging from 1 (very easy, not probable, and low capacity, respectively) to 7 (very difficult, very probable, and high capacity, respectively). Then the performance period—including the assess- ment of cardiovascular activity—started. After the 5 min of task performance, the experimenter reentered the room, removed the blood pressure cuff and the electrodes, and informed participants that the experimental session was over but that she would like to ask them to complete another short paper– pencil questionnaire (CES-D, BDI-II), ostensibly for an unrelated questionnaire validation study. Finally, participants were thanked, carefully debriefed, and given their course credit. Results Self-Reported Mood We calculated two mood scores by summing the scores of the positive hedonic tone adjectives of the UWIST scale (  .96) and of the negative hedonic tone adjectives (  .84). Two (dyspho- ria)  2 (task difficulty) between-persons analyses of variance (ANOVAs) revealed only the anticipated highly significant dys- phoria main effects (Fs  21.54, ps  .001, .304  2  .330), in absence of any other main or interaction effects (Fs  2.06, ps  .15). As expected, dysphoric participants had higher scores on the negative items (dysphoric M  11.78, SE  0.87 vs. nondysphoric M  6.19, SE  0.70) and lower scores on the positive items (dysphoric M  14.93, SE  0.87 vs. nondysphoric M  20.85, SE  0.95) compared to nondysphoric participants. Thus, dysphoric students were in a more negative mood during the experimental session.1 Demand Appraisals A preliminary analysis revealed that the ratings of task diffi- culty, capacity, and success probability were highly intercorre- 1 We also formed a global mood score of positive and reverse-coded negative items (  .91) that revealed lower scores for dysphoric partic- ipants (M  35.26, SE  1.36) than for nondysphoric participants (M  46.65, SE  1.42), F(1, 49)  33.57, p  .001, 2  .404. The global score was correlated with the positive and negative scores, r(53)  .90 and .87, ps  .001. The two subscales were also correlated, r(53)  .57, p  .001. 149DYSPHORIA AND EFFORT MOBILIZATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . lated. Therefore, we created a perceived task demand index by summing the ratings of task difficulty, reverse-coded own capac- ity, and reverse-coded success probability so that a higher score reflected higher perceived task demand (  .84). Participants in the difficult-dysphoric group should appraise task demand as high- est and participants in the easy-nondysphoric group should ap- praise demand as lowest, with the easy-dysphoric and the difficult- nondysphoric groups in between. We subjected perceived task demand to a 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVA. How- ever, there were neither the expected main effects nor an interac- tion (Fs  1.03, ps  .31). Cell means and standard errors were as follows: difficult-dysphoric (M  9.79, SE  0.74), easy- dysphoric (M  8.31, SE  0.92), difficult-nondysphoric (M  9.07, SE  0.61), and easy-nondysphoric (M  9.36, SE  1.29). Cardiovascular Baselines For the sake of comparability between the blood pressure measures and the continuously assessed IBIs, we integrated the ECG data over 1-min intervals. Then we calculated cardiovascular baseline scores for SBP, DBP, and HR by averaging the last four of the eight measures obtained during habituation (s were .91 for SBP, .94 for DBP, and .99 for HR).2 Means and standard errors are depicted in Table 1. According to 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVAs,3 there were no differences between the experimental conditions for SBP and DBP baseline values (Fs  1.14, ps  .29). An ANOVA for HR baseline values revealed a marginally reliable main effect of dyspho- ria, F(1, 44)  3.57, p  .07, 2  .072, that was considered in an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), which is presented below. Cardiovascular Reactivity We created cardiovascular reactivity (delta) scores for each partic- ipant by subtracting the baseline values from the arithmetic means obtained during task performance (see Llabre, Spitzer, Saab, Ironson, & Schneiderman, 1991). Preliminary 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task diffi- culty) ANCOVAs that tested for associations between the reactivity scores and the respective baseline values found no significant covaria- tions (Fs  0.71, ps  .40). Consequently, we analyzed the raw reactivity scores without baseline correction. SBP. Cell means are depicted in Figure 2. In confirmation of our predictions, a 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVA revealed that the only significant effect was the expected crossover interaction between dysphoria and difficulty, F(1, 49)  5.37, p  .03, 2  .094, in absence of reliable main effects of task diffi- culty, F(1, 49)  2.54, p  .12, and dysphoria, F(1, 49)  1.00, p  .32. Additional cell contrasts revealed a significant difference between the strong reactivity of dysphoric participants (M  5.73, SE  1.25) and the weak reactivity of nondysphoric participants (M  1.51, SE  1.25) in the easy condition, t(49)  2.24, p  .02 (because of our clear theory-based directional predictions, focused contrasts are reported one-tailed). In the difficult condition, reac- tivity of dysphoric participants (M  4.81, SE  1.33) tended to be slightly lower than that of nondysphoric participants (M  6.49, SE  1.19), t(49)  0.98, p  .17 (one-tailed). DBP and HR. Means and standard errors are presented in Table 2. According to 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVAs, there were no significant main or interaction effects for either reactivity measure (Fs  1.07, ps  .30), indicating that there were no reliable differences in DBP and HR reactivity between the four experimental groups. Task Performance Raw performance indices like the total number of stimuli per- formed or the number of correctly and incorrectly identified stim- uli were of limited interest because these indices were mainly determined by the greater number of stimuli performed in the difficult condition due to shorter presentation times (Fs  13.98, ps  .001, .224  2  .869). We therefore calculated the ratios of correctly identified, incorrectly identified, and omitted stimuli to the total number of stimuli performed. Furthermore, we regis- tered the reaction times for the number of correctly and incorrectly 2 For the sake of easier readability, we recoded the IBIs so that we will from now on refer to HR in beats per minute. The reason for averaging the last four baseline measures is that repeated-measures ANOVAs revealed a decline of cardiovascular values over the first measures, but the last four measures remained stable ( ps  .30). HR data of some participants could not be analyzed because of too many movement artifacts. Therefore, analyses of HR data are based on 47 and 48 participants, respectively. 3 Due to the small number of men in each condition, it was not possible to look at gender as a separate factor in this study. Table 1 Means and Standard Errors of Cardiovascular Baselines in Study 1 Condition M SE SBP DBP HR SBP DBP HR Easy Nondysphoric 105.55 66.66 76.54 2.85 1.52 2.18 Dysphoric 106.72 69.78 81.74 1.29 1.26 4.96 Difficult Nondysphoric 103.57 67.85 79.46 2.32 1.92 3.35 Dysphoric 106.39 68.32 89.10 2.22 1.74 4.60 Note. Systolic blood pressure (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) are shown in millimeters of mercury. Heart rate (HR) is shown in beats per minute. Figure 2. Cell means and standard errors of systolic blood pressure (SBP) reactivity in Study 1. 150 BRINKMANN AND GENDOLLA Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . identified stimuli as well as for the total number of stimuli per- formed. Reaction times were normally distributed. Data of 1 participant were excluded from all analyses because the response latencies differed more than three standard deviations from the respective group mean. Two (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVAs revealed task difficulty main effects (Fs  7.67, ps  .01, .139  2  .259) with respect to the following: ratio of incorrectly identified stimuli (easy M  0.01, SE  0.01 vs. difficult M  0.04, SE  0.01), reaction times of correctly identified stimuli (easy M  332.66 ms, SE  29.07 vs. difficult M  462.12 ms, SE  14.56), and total reaction times (easy M  334.56 ms, SE  29.11 vs. difficult M  461.94 ms, SE  14.90), in absence of other main or interaction effects (Fs  0.84, ps  .36). There were neither main nor interaction effects for the ratios of correctly identified and omitted stimuli (Fs  1.53, ps  .22). In summary, these results show better performance of participants in the easy task condition according to some indices, whereas dysphoria did not have a significant influence. Finally, we examined the relation of performance indices and SBP reactivity. Correlation coeffi- cients ranged from r  .24 to r  .22 ( ps  .22), indicating a weak tendency to better performance and faster reaction times (negative relation) associated with more effort. Mediation Analysis The results of cardiovascular reactivity display the predicted crossover interaction of dysphoria and task difficulty. In order to investigate the underlying mechanism of this effect, we examined the data with regard to mediation by momentary mood and per- ceived task demand as reported by Gendolla and Krüsken (2002c). Contrary to our expectation, positive and negative mood were not correlated with perceived task demand, .10  r(53)  .07, ps  .48. Then, we examined (separately for each task condition) the association of mood and perceived task demand with SBP reactivity. The correlations were generally weak, but the relation of negative mood to greater SBP change in the easy condition approached significance, r(24)  .38, p  .10 (two-tailed). As one would expect from these weak associations, mediation analyses performed separately for each task condition did not reveal evi- dence for mood and demand appraisals as mediators for dysphoria effects on SBP reactivity. Discussion The main result of this study was the predicted crossover inter- action effect between dysphoria and task difficulty on SBP reac- tivity in absence of any significant main effects. This finding clearly shows that there was no general motivational deficit of the dysphoric participants with regard to resource mobilization. Rather, dysphorics mobilized even more resources than nondys- phorics when they performed an easy version of the task. We should nevertheless note that additionally performed fo- cused cell comparisons found that the lower SBP reactivity of dysphoric participants in the difficult condition was not signifi- cantly different from the higher reactivity of nondysphorics. This may be attributed to a suboptimal difficulty manipulation. The fact that participants’ demand appraisals were below the scale’s mid- point (i.e., 11) also suggests that the difficult task was indeed not difficult enough for all dysphoric participants to withhold effort. As outlined in the introduction, we reasoned that dysphoria would be associated with negative mood and related to a more pessimistic evaluation of task demand. Dysphoric and nondyspho- ric participants—as selected 4 weeks prior to the experimental session—indeed differed with regard to their naturally occurring mood when they performed the mental concentration task. In contrast, the task demand index assessed prior to performance did not corroborate our assumption. Likewise, mood was not associ- ated with perceived task demand and the proposed mediating mechanism was not supported. The finding that DBP and HR reactivity were not influenced by dysphoria or task difficulty can be explained by the physiological mechanisms determining DBP and HR activity. As noted earlier, DBP and HR are less systematically influenced by the sympathetic nervous system than SBP. Therefore, DBP and HR can, but do not necessarily have to, show the same pattern as SBP (Brownley et al., 2000; Papillo & Shapiro, 1990). Finally, the analysis of task performance revealed better performance of participants in the easy task condition for some indices (smaller ratio of incorrectly identified stimuli as well as faster reaction times). Besides these rather trivial difficulty effects, no significant influence of dyspho- ria became evident. Study 2: Memory Task This study aimed to replicate and extend the findings of Study 1. In order to generalize dysphoria effects on effort intensity, we administered a memory task instead of the concentration task. Except for this, the same materials and procedure were used as in Study 1. In addition, we recruited more men for this study to have them better represented than in the previous study. Participants were again randomly assigned to the conditions of a 2 (dysphoric vs. nondysphoric)  2 (task: easy vs. difficult) between-persons design respecting the restriction of equal cell distributions for dysphorics and nondysphorics as well as for men and women. Method Participants Participants were selected out of a sample of 398 university students with various majors who had been recruited via an- nouncements in introductory classes that were followed by short Table 2 Means and Standard Errors of DBP and HR Reactivity in Study 1 Condition M SE DBP HR DBP HR Easy Nondysphoric 3.09 1.57 0.84 1.24 Dysphoric 4.19 0.88 1.63 1.29 Difficult Nondysphoric 4.56 1.88 1.06 1.33 Dysphoric 4.73 0.05 0.89 0.89 Note. Diastolic blood pressure (DBP) is displayed as changes in milli- meters of mercury. Heart rate (HR) is displayed as changes in beats per minute. 151DYSPHORIA AND EFFORT MOBILIZATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . questionnaire sessions to assess dysphoria by means of the CES-D. Students scoring in the upper or lower quartile of the distributions of men and women, respectively, (i.e., 7 or 16 for men and 10 or 18 for women) were invited to participate in an osten- sibly unrelated experiment via an anonymous code. For their participation in the experimental session, respondents received 10 Swiss francs (about $8). As in Study 1, only participants whose scores remained within the limits set by the initial distribution were retained for analyses. Consequently, a total of 64 participants (41 women, 23 men; average age 26 years) constituted our final sample. Thirty-two students scored in the lower quartile of the CES-D (t1: M  5.04, SE  0.59; t2: M  6.09, SE  0.45) and were therefore referred to as nondysphoric. The remaining 32 students scored in the upper quartile of the CES-D (t1: M  24.67, SE  2.39; t2: M  26.09, SE  1.29) and were therefore referred to as dysphoric. The distribution of men and women was balanced in the four cells (11 women and 5 men in the difficult- nondysphoric cell, 10 women and 6 men in the other three cells). Procedure The experimental session was again computerized and accom- panied by a hired experimenter who was unaware of both hypoth- eses and participants’ dysphoria status. Physiological apparatus and self-report measures (CES-D, BDI-II, and UWIST) were iden- tical to Study 1. Both depression scales again showed high internal consistency (s  .93) and were highly correlated with one an- other, r(64)  .89, p  .001. Participants attended the experimen- tal session individually, were greeted, and were seated in front of a computer monitor. After having provided signed consent, the blood pressure cuff and the electrodes were attached, and partici- pants started reading the instructions and providing the answers to the biographical questions and the UWIST scale. After an 8-min habituation period during which cardiovascular measures were taken in the same way as in the previous study, participants learned that they would perform a memory task for the next 5 min. They were asked to memorize a list of senseless letter strings, each string consisting of four letters (e.g., WPQA, CLTW) and to recall the entire list afterwards. The list comprised four strings in the easy condition and nine strings in the difficult condition. The exact number of presented strings had been pre- tested to adjust the difficulty level. After participants had learned about the forthcoming task, they were presented the list they would have to memorize for 2 s. This was supposed to give them an impression of task difficulty. Before starting to memorize, partic- ipants answered the same subjective demand questions as in Study 1 (i.e., perceived difficulty, probability, and capacity) on the same 7-point scales. Then the 5-min performance period started during which cardiovascular measures were taken. Subsequently, the ex- perimenter reentered the room and gave participants a sheet of paper and a pencil so that they could note the letter strings they recalled. Afterwards, the experimenter removed the blood pressure cuff and the electrodes and asked participants to complete an ostensibly unrelated questionnaire (i.e., CES-D, BDI-II). Finally, participants were thanked, carefully debriefed, and given their payment. Results Self-Reported Mood We again calculated a positive (  .95) and a negative (  .89) mood sum score and submitted them to 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVAs. The only significant results were the expected dysphoria main effects (Fs  12.25, ps  .001, .168  2  .222) in absence of other main or interaction effects (Fs  1.06, ps  .30). Accordingly, dysphoric participants had higher negative scores (dysphoric M  11.19, SE  1.09 vs. nondyspho- ric M  6.22, SE  0.46) and lower positive scores (dysphoric M  15.91, SE  0.84 vs. nondysphoric M  20.31, SE  0.92) compared to nondysphoric participants, indicating that dysphoric students were in a more negative mood.4 Demand Appraisals As in Study 1, we calculated a perceived task demand index (  .80) so that higher scores reflected higher perceived task demand. We then subjected the index to a 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVA. This revealed a significant dysphoria main effect, F(1, 60)  6.70, p  .02, 2  .098, indicating that dysphoric participants appraised the task as more demanding than nondysphoric participants (dysphoric M  14.78, SE  0.57 vs. nondysphoric M  12.69, SE  0.57). Neither the task main effect nor the interaction proved to be reliable (Fs  0.94, ps  .33). Nevertheless, cell means were in the hypothesized order: difficult- dysphoric (M  14.81, SE  0.78), easy-dysphoric (M  14.75, SE  0.86), difficult-nondysphoric (M  13.44, SE  0.90), and easy-nondysphoric (M  11.94, SE  0.68). Cardiovascular Baselines Again, we integrated the ECG data over 1-min intervals and calculated cardiovascular baseline scores for SBP, DBP, and HR by averaging the last three of the seven measures obtained during habituation (s were .95 for SBP, .94 for DBP, and .99 for HR).5 Means and standard errors are presented in Table 3. Preliminary 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty)  2 (gender) ANOVAs of the baseline values revealed a significant gender main effect for SBP, F(1, 56)  21.21, p  .001, 2  .258, due to men having higher SBP baseline values (M  111.25, SE  1.94) than women (M  99.10, SE  1.63)—a common finding (Wolf et al., 1997). On the DBP baseline values, there was a significant task difficulty main effect, F(1, 56)  5.63, p  .03, 2  .077, which was further 4 The global mood score (  .92) revealed lower scores for dysphoric participants (M  36.72, SE  1.77) than for nondysphoric participants (M  46.09, SE  1.15), F(1, 60)  19.48, p  .001, 2  .242. The global score was correlated with the positive and negative scores, r(64)  .90 and .89, ps  .001. The two subscales were also correlated, r(53)  .60, p  .001. 5 As in Study 1, we recoded the IBIs so that we refer to HR in beats per minute. The reason for averaging the last three baseline measures is that repeated measures ANOVAs revealed a decline of SBP and DBP values over the first measures, but the last four (SBP) and three (SBP and DBP) measures remained stable ( ps  .23). There was no decline of HR values ( ps  .25), but for the sake of comparability with SBP and DBP, we also averaged the last three baseline measures. Due to movement artifacts, there were HR data for only 59 participants available. 152 BRINKMANN AND GENDOLLA Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . qualified by a significant Difficulty  Gender interaction, F(1, 56)  4.50, p  .04, 2  .061. Finally, there was a dysphoria main effect on the HR baseline values, F(1, 51)  4.17, p  .05, 2  .062, indicating higher HR baseline values for nondysphoric (M  78.87, SE  2.35) than for dysphoric (M  70.87, SE  2.32) participants. These findings were considered in ANCOVAs of the cardiovascular reactivity scores, which are presented below. Cardiovascular Reactivity We calculated cardiovascular reactivity (delta) scores in the same way as in Study 1. Preliminary 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANCOVAs on these reactivity scores with the respec- tive baseline values as covariates revealed significant covariations for all cardiovascular indices (Fs  4.22, ps  .05, .061  2  .109, .34  r  .22). Because of this and because of the above mentioned differences in cardiovascular baseline values, we ad- justed the SBP, DBP, and HR reactivity scores with regard to their respective baseline values in order to prevent carry-over effects and biases due to the law of initial values (see Llabre et al., 1991). Preliminary 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty)  2 (gender) ANOVAs of the baseline-adjusted SBP, DBP, and HR reactivity scores did not reveal any main or interaction effects for gender (Fs  2.58, ps  .11). Therefore, we did not consider gender in the following analyses. SBP. A 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVA of the baseline-adjusted reactivity scores revealed only the predicted significant interaction effect, F(1, 60)  5.17, p  .03, 2  .077, in absence of significant main effects of task difficulty, F(1, 60)  2.06, p  .15, or dysphoria, F(1, 60)  0.06, p  .50. As depicted in Figure 3, SBP reactivity clearly reflected the predicted crossover interaction pattern. Additionally, we conducted planned cell con- trasts that confirmed a significant difference between nondyspho- ric individuals (M  8.58, SE  1.62) and dysphoric individuals (M  5.06, SE  1.14) in the difficult condition, t(60)  1.77, p  .05 (one-tailed). In the easy condition, the reactivity of dysphoric participants (M  6.24, SE  1.37) tended to be higher than that of nondysphoric participants (M  3.37, SE  1.45), t(60)  1.44, p  .08 (one-tailed). DBP and HR. Means and standard errors are presented in Table 4. A 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVA of the baseline-adjusted DBP reactivity scores revealed no significant effects, Fs(1, 60)  1.69, ps  .19. A 2 (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVA of the baseline-adjusted HR reactivity scores revealed a significant task difficulty main effect, F(1, 55)  5.79, p  .03, 2  .091, due to higher reactivity in the difficult condition (M  6.24, SE  0.98) than in the easy condition (M  3.31, SE  0.68). There was neither a main effect of dysphoria, F(1, 55)  0.01, p  .50, nor an interaction effect, F(1, 55)  2.57, p  .11. Task Performance Raw task performance indices of the memory task (e.g., the number of correctly or overall recalled letter strings) were of limited interest because they were mainly restricted by task diffi- culty and thus only showed difficulty main effects, Fs(1, 60)  16.34, ps  .001, .213  2  .642. Therefore, the primary performance indices were the percentages (a) of overall recalled to presented strings and (b) of correctly recalled to presented strings. Two (dysphoria)  2 (task difficulty) ANOVAs of these difficulty-adjusted indices also revealed significant task difficulty main effects (Fs  16.20, ps  .001, .211  2  .282) in absence of any other effects (Fs  0.56, ps  .46). On average, participants in the easy condition overall recalled 100% of the presented strings, whereas participants in the difficult condition overall re- Table 3 Means and Standard Errors of Cardiovascular Baselines in Study 2 Condition M SE SBP DBP HR SBP DBP HR Easy Nondysphoric 102.90 63.84 76.47 2.64 1.46 2.49 Dysphoric 102.93 65.52 73.81 2.66 1.59 3.38 Difficult Nondysphoric 105.30 70.63 81.27 2.69 1.78 3.99 Dysphoric 102.75 65.85 67.73 3.68 2.79 3.07 Note. Systolic blood pressure (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) are shown in millimeters of mercury. Heart rate (HR) is shown in beats per minute. Figure 3. Cell means and standard errors of baseline-adjusted systolic blood pressure (SBP) reactivity in Study 2. Table 4 Means and Standard Errors of Baseline-Adjusted DBP and Baseline-Adjusted HR Reactivity in Study 2 Condition M SE DBP HR DBP HR Easy Nondysphoric 5.12 4.26 1.01 0.83 Dysphoric 2.59 2.47 0.98 1.02 Difficult Nondysphoric 5.03 5.21 0.93 1.43 Dysphoric 4.84 7.19 1.24 1.34 Note. Diastolic blood pressure (DBP) is displayed as changes in milli- meters of mercury. Heart rate (HR) is displayed as changes in beats per minute. 153DYSPHORIA AND EFFORT MOBILIZATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . called 82% of the presented strings. Compared to the number of presented strings in each condition, participants in the easy con- dition correctly recalled 88%, whereas participants in the difficult condition correctly recalled 61%. Finally, correlations of perfor- mance indices and SBP reactivity ranged from r  .06 to r  .33 ( ps  .06), indicating again a tendency to better performance associated with more effort. Mediation Analysis As in Study 1, we examined the associations of momentary mood, perceived task demand, and SBP reactivity. In contrast to Study 1 and according to expectations, positive mood correlated negatively with perceived task demand, r(64)  .25, p  .05 (two-tailed), and negative mood tended to correlate positively with perceived task demand, r(64)  .24, p  .06 (two-tailed). How- ever, the indirect effect (see Sobel, 1982) of dysphoria on per- ceived task demand via positive and negative mood was not reliable (zs  1.02, ps  .30). Negative mood and perceived task demand tended to be associated with SBP reactivity in both task conditions, in the appropriate direction, though only one of the four correlations approached significance (greater demand ap- praisal with less SBP change in the difficult condition). Mediation analyses performed separately for each task condition revealed no evidence for the mediation of dysphoria effects on SBP reactivity by mood and demand appraisals. Discussion The findings of Study 2 conceptually replicate and complement those of Study 1. According to the self-report measures, partici- pants who were assigned to the dysphoric and nondysphoric groups on the basis of their depression scores 3 weeks prior to the experimental session clearly differed with regard to their naturally occurring mood during the experiment. As it is the most relevant result of this study, the predicted crossover interaction pattern of dysphoria and task difficulty on SBP reactivity again became evident in absence of any significant main effects. In the difficult condition, systolic reactivity was stronger for nondysphoric than for dysphoric individuals, but in the easy condition, the pattern was reversed. Here, reactivity tended to be stronger for dysphorics than for nondysphorics. As in Study 1, the effects on DBP and HR reactivity did not correspond to those of SBP, which is, however, not surprising given their less systematic linkage to sympathetic arousal (Brownley et al., 2000; Papillo & Shapiro, 1990). Unlike Study 1, results on the perceived task demand index assessed prior to performance confirmed that dysphoric partici- pants evaluated task demand higher than nondysphoric partici- pants. Moreover, participants in the difficult-dysphoric group ap- praised the task the most demanding and participants in the easy- nondysphoric group appraised it the least demanding. This displays the expected order, even though the task difficulty main effect was not reliable. However, the mediation of dysphoria effects on effort mobilization via perceived task demand as re- ported by Gendolla and Krüsken (2002c) was not corroborated. Finally, as in the previous study, participants’ task performance was not influenced by dysphoria but only by task difficulty, with participants in the easy condition performing better than partici- pants in the difficult condition. Meta-Analysis of SBP Reactivity in Studies 1 and 2 Both experiments found the predicted crossover interaction ef- fect of dysphoria and task difficulty on SBP reactivity in absence of significant main effects. However, as reported above, additional cell comparisons revealed a significant difference between the easy-dysphoric and easy-nondysphoric cells in Study 1 but no significant difference between the difficult-nondysphoric and difficult-dysphoric cells. In Study 2, dysphoria had a significant effect in the difficult condition but only a marginally significant effect in the easy condition. Therefore, we additionally tested our predictions with an analysis that combined the two studies using the “Stouffer” or “adding z-method” described by Rosenthal (1978). It has to be acknowledged, however, that the two cognitive tasks were not identical, and their difficulty levels were not exactly corresponding. The adding z-method consists of calculating cumulative z scores by (a) converting the one-tailed p level of each cell comparison to its associated z score, (b) summing the z scores, and (c) dividing the sum by the square root of the number of studies being com- bined. The results confirmed the predicted cell differences: In the easy condition, dysphoric participants had higher SBP reactivity than nondysphoric participants, z  2.57, p  .01 (one-tailed). In the difficult condition, nondysphoric participants showed higher SBP reactivity than dysphoric participants, z  1.88, p  .04 (one-tailed).6 Together with the replicated significant crossover interaction in absence of significant main effects, this indicates that dysphoria only leads to less effort mobilization when a task is difficult. But dysphoria results in the mobilization of high effort when a task is easy. General Discussion According to the present results, dysphoria does not lead to a general deficit in resource mobilization. Rather, it depends on the task context whether dysphoria reduces or even boosts effort intensity. As indicated by the two studies and additionally con- firmed by the combined analysis, SBP reactivity—our central dependent variable referring to resource mobilization—displayed the predicted crossover interaction effect of dysphoria and task difficulty in absence of significant main effects. When task diffi- culty was high, nondysphorics showed higher performance-related SBP reactivity than dysphorics, which is in accordance with the idea of a motivational deficit in dysphoria. But when task difficulty was low, dysphoric participants showed higher SBP reactivity than nondysphorics, which is the very opposite of a motivational def- icit. Accordingly, dysphoria can increase effort intensity when task difficulty is low, as shown in the present studies, or unfixed (i.e., individuals are asked to “do their best” instead of attaining a defined performance standard), as has been shown in previous studies (Brinkmann & Gendolla, 2007). Regarding our research sample, it is of note that our studies involved groups of dysphoric students with CES-D scores from 16 to 51, averaging at 30 (Study 1) and 25 (Study 2), respectively. This is beyond the usual cut-off score of 16 (Radloff, 1977) and 6 Other methods summarized by Rosenthal (1978) like the “method of adding probabilities,” the “method of adding ts,” or the “method of adding logs” revealed virtually the same results. 154 BRINKMANN AND GENDOLLA Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . thus makes us confident that these samples represent cases of dysphoria with—at least—subclinical symptoms of depression. Of course, future research may benefit from including clinical mea- sures (e.g., structured clinical interviews) and clinical samples. The finding that dysphoria can boost effort intensity in the context of easy and unfixed challenges confirmed our predictions derived from the notion that a central characteristic of dysphoria and depression is an enduring negative mood (APA, 1994) and from theorizing about the role of mood states in resource mobili- zation in terms of the MBM (Gendolla, 2000). In support of this reasoning, both studies found that dysphoric and nondysphoric individuals differed significantly with respect to their momentary mood state—dysphorics’ mood was much more negative than nondysphorics’ mood. With respect to perceived task demand, Study 2 found the expected dysphoria main effect—that was paralleled by the corre- lation of mood and perceived task demand—as well as an increase in demand appraisals from the easy-nondysphoric to the difficult- dysphoric condition, even though the task difficulty main effect was not reliable. One plausible reason for the different results in Study 1 is that those participants had the opportunity to practice on the concentration task before making their judgments, but partic- ipants in Study 2 did not. Therefore, individuals in Study 2 had to rely much more on other information than task difficulty—for instance, their momentary mood state. This explanation is in accordance with the MBM postulate that the effective weight of moods in evaluations and judgments depends on the amount of other accessible, diagnostic information (Abele, Gendolla, & Pet- zold, 1998; Abele & Petzold, 1994; Gendolla, 2000). Moreover, given that appraisals are considered to be explicit as well as implicit (Kappas, 2006), the absence of an effect on the three self-report questions in Study 1 does not exclude the possibility that implicit difficulty appraisals influenced the mobilization of resources. In this context, it has to be pointed out that experienced task demand during rather than before performance is thought to be the critical variable, which is, however, difficult to assess. According to the MBM logic, mood states should mediate dysphoria effects on demand appraisals and effort mobilization, and demand appraisals should mediate dysphoria effects on effort mobilization. The present studies did not find evidence for this assumption reported by Gendolla and Krüsken (2002c): In Study 1, demand appraisals did not form the expected pattern. In Study 2, demand appraisals and negative mood—but not positive mood— tended to show the expected associations with SBP reactivity. These correlations were, however, weak, and the indirect effects were not reliable. Thus, at this time, we cannot tell whether an informational impact of momentary mood was the mechanism underlying the dysphoria effects on resource mobilization. On the one hand, our experimental design with a maximum of 16 participants per cell and restricted variance within the conditions does not provide adequate statistical power for examining a causal chain with three to four variables. Therefore, it might be that the weak evidence of Study 2 comes out more clearly in a design with more statistical power. In favor of this assumption is evidence concerning not only mood congruency effects on evaluations and judgments in depres- sion and dysphoria (Scott & Ingram, 1998) but also mood effects on perceived task demand and effort mobilization in studies within the same experimental design as the present ones (Gendolla & Krüsken, 2002b, 2002c). On the other hand, it might be that naturally occurring dysphoria differs from manipulated transient mood states in some respects: Even though dysphoria has been shown to have similar effects on effort mobilization, the principal mechanism might be something other than via momentary mood and demand appraisals—or at least the consciously experienced and verbalized parts of them. Future researchers interested in dysphoria and depression effects on cardiovascular reactivity should investigate the underlying mechanism, maybe using a stronger or even more obvious manipulation of objective task difficulty in order to achieve a stronger impact on demand apprais- als. Future researchers might furthermore manipulate more than two levels of task difficulty to examine a broader range of the predictions depicted in Figure 1. A finding of the present studies that also deserves discussion is that task performance was affected only by task difficulty—which is a rather trivial effect—whereas dysphoria had no significant impact. Furthermore, effort was weakly or not related to perfor- mance in both studies and both difficulty conditions. Previous research, on the one hand, has shown positive associations be- tween performance and SBP reactivity and has thus provided evidence that, in some circumstances, effort may increase perfor- mance (Gendolla et al., 2001; Gendolla & Krüsken, 2002a, 2002b, 2002c). On the other hand, the vast body of research reporting cognitive deficits in clinical and subclinical depression, including impairments in the domains of attention, memory, and executive functions (see Burt et al., 1995; Rogers et al., 2004, for reviews), suggests diminished performance of dysphoric participants, espe- cially in the difficult condition where they mobilized less effort. We attribute the absence of such performance effects in the present studies to the fact that participants were university students who are unlikely to suffer from massive cognitive deficits. More- over, as we did not focus on cognitive deficits in dysphoria, we selected tasks that met our criteria of simplicity and minimal physical demand rather than tests specially designed to reveal cognitive impairments. At this point, it is also of note that perfor- mance and effort are complex constructs and that it would be incorrect to equate the two; performance on a task is an outcome that is determined by effort, ability, and strategy use, and different tasks are differentially influenced by these factors (Locke & Latham, 1990). Furthermore, task performance only reflects the effectiveness of behavior but not its efficiency, which is the relationship between outcome and invested effort (see Eysenck, Derakshan, Santos, & Calvo, 2007). The absence of dysphoria effects on performance in our studies might thus represent a case of successful effort mobilization (see Hockey, 1997). In summary, the present research demonstrates that dysphoria influences resource mobilization but does so with dependence on task characteristics. In accordance with R. A. Wright (1996), we regard resource or effort mobilization as a direct indicator of one specific aspect of motivation, namely the intensity of motivation at a given point in time (Brehm & Self, 1989). This means that sympathetically mediated cardiovascular reactivity displays the mobilization of resources to actively cope with demands. In this sense, we conclude from our studies that dysphoria and depression are not necessarily associated with a general motivational deficit. We have shown that dysphoria can even lead to increased effort intensity—and thus to enhanced motivational intensity—given the specific task characteristics of an easy task or a task without fixed 155DYSPHORIA AND EFFORT MOBILIZATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . performance standards as shown in the studies by Brinkmann and Gendolla (2007). To be clear, our studies were not concerned with a problem specifically prominent in depression, namely the initiation of ac- tions. However, under the condition that behavior has been insti- gated, our research demonstrates that measures of effort mobili- zation may complement and possibly also explain performance measures. There are instances when dysphoric individuals are willing to mobilize much effort and others when they withhold effort, which might also have an impact on performance. More- over, this sheds light on a pattern of task engagement that may be maladaptive: High engagement at a point that does not call for much effort but disengagement at a point where it would not be necessary to withhold effort. On the other hand, this implies that reduced daily demands (i.e., easy tasks but also do-your-best tasks) can lead to high task engagement—an experience from which dysphoric individuals ultimately may benefit in terms of experi- enced efficacy. References Abele, A. E., Gendolla, G. H. E., & Petzold, P. (1998). Positive mood and in-group-out-group differentiation in a minimal group setting. Person- ality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 1343–1357. Abele, A. E., & Petzold, P. (1994). How does mood operate in an impres- sion formation task? An information integration approach. European Journal of Social Psychology, 24, 173–187. Abramson, L. Y., Alloy, L. B., & Rosoff, R. (1981). Depression and the generation of complex hypotheses in the judgment of contingency. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 19, 35–45. Ach, N. (1935). Analyse des Willens. In E. Abderhalden (Ed.), Handbuch der biologischen Arbeitsmethoden (Vol. 6). Berlin, Germany: Urban & Schwarzenberg. American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical man- ual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the BDI-II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. Bongard, S. (1995). Mental effort during active and passive coping: A dual task analysis. Psychophysiology, 32, 242–248. Brehm, J. W., & Self, E. A. (1989). The intensity of motivation. Annual Review of Psychology, 40, 109–131. Brickenkamp, R. (1981). Test d2 (7th ed.). Göttingen, Germany: Hogrefe. Brinkmann, K., & Gendolla, G. H. E. (2007). Dysphoria and mobilization of mental effort: Effects on cardiovascular reactivity. Motivation and Emotion, 31, 71–82. Brownley, K. A., Hurwitz, B. E., & Schneiderman, N. (2000). Cardiovas- cular psychophysiology. In J. T. Cacioppo, L. G. Tassinary, & G. G. Berntson (Eds.), Handbook of psychophysiology (pp. 224–264). New York: Cambridge University Press. Burt, D. B., Zembar, M. J., & Niederehe, G. (1995). Depression and memory impairment: A meta-analysis of the association, its pattern, and specificity. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 285–305. Carroll, D., Phillips, A. C., Hunt, K., & Der, G. (2007). Symptoms of depression and cardiovascular reactions to acute psychological stress: Evidence from a population study. Biological Psychology, 75, 68–74. Cunningham, M. R. (1988). What do you do when you’re happy or blue? Mood, expectancies, and behavioral interest. Motivation and Emotion, 12, 309–331. Davidson, R. J., Pizzagalli, D., Nitschke, J. B., & Putnam, K. (2002). Depression: Perspectives from affective neuroscience. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 545–574. Elliott, R., Sahakian, B. J., Herrod, J. J., Robbins, T. W., & Paykel, E. S. (1997). Abnormal response to negative feedback in unipolar depression: Evidence for a diagnosis specific impairment. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 63, 74–82. Eysenck, M. W., Derakshan, N., Santos, R., & Calvo, M. G. (2007). Anxiety and cognitive performance: Attentional control theory. Emo- tion, 7, 336–353. Fuhrer, R., & Rouillon, F. (1989). La version française de l’échelle CES-D (Center for Epidemiologic Studies–Depression Scale): Description et traduction de l’échelle d’autoévaluation. European Psychiatry, 4, 163– 166. Gendolla, G. H. E. (2000). On the impact of mood on behavior: An integrative theory and a review. Review of General Psychology, 4, 378–408. Gendolla, G. H. E., Abele, A. E., & Krüsken, J. (2001). The informational impact of mood on effort mobilization: A study of cardiovascular and electrodermal responses. Emotion, 1, 12–24. Gendolla, G. H. E., & Brinkmann, K. (2005). The role of mood states in self-regulation: Effects on action preferences and resource mobilization. European Psychologist, 10, 187–198. Gendolla, G. H. E., & Krüsken, J. (2002a). Informational mood impact on effort-related cardiovascular response: The diagnostic value of mood counts. Emotion, 2, 251–262. Gendolla, G. H. E., & Krüsken, J. (2002b). The joint effect of informa- tional mood impact and performance-contingent consequences on effort- related cardiovascular response. Journal of Personality and Social Psy- chology, 83, 271–283. Gendolla, G. H. E., & Krüsken, J. (2002c). Mood, task demand, and effort-related cardiovascular response. Cognition & Emotion, 16, 577– 603. Gray, J. A. (1982). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry into the functions of the septo-hippocampal system. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. Heckhausen, H. (1991). Motivation and action. New York: Springer. Henriques, J. B., & Davidson, R. J. (2000). Decreased responsiveness to reward in depression. Cognition & Emotion, 14, 711–724. Hertel, P. T. (2000). The cognitive-initiative account of depression-related impairments in memory. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 39, 47–71. Hertel, P. T., & Gerstle, M. (2003). Depressive deficits in forgetting. Psychological Science, 14, 573–578. Hockey, G. R. (1997). Compensatory control in the regulation of human performance under stress and high workload: A cognitive-energetical framework. Biological Psychology, 45, 73–93. Ingram, R. E., & Siegle, G. J. (2002). Contemporary methodological issues in the study of depression: Not your father’s Oldsmobile. In I. H. Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (pp. 86–114). New York: Guilford Press. Kappas, A. (2006). Appraisals are direct, immediate, intuitive, and unwit- ting. . .and some are reflective. Cognition & Emotion, 20, 952–975. Kavanagh, D. J., & Bower, G. H. (1985). Mood and self-efficacy: Impact of joy and sadness on perceived capabilities. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 9, 507–525. Kuhl, J., & Helle, P. (1986). Motivational and volitional determinants of depression: The degenerated-intention hypothesis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 247–251. Light, K. C., Dolan, C. A., Davis, M. R., & Sherwood, A. (1992). Cardiovascular responses to an active coping challenge as predictors of blood pressure patterns 10 to 15 years later. Psychosomatic Medicine, 54, 217–230. Llabre, M. M., Spitzer, S. B., Saab, P. G., Ironson, G. H., & Schneiderman, N. (1991). The reliability and specificity of delta versus residualized change as measures of cardiovascular reactivity to behavioral chal- lenges. Psychophysiology, 28, 701–711. Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal setting & task performance. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 156 BRINKMANN AND GENDOLLA Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . Matthews, G., Jones, D. M., & Chamberlain, A. G. (1990). Refining the measurement of mood: The UWIST Mood Adjective Checklist. British Journal of Psychology, 81, 17–42. Mineka, S., Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1998). Comorbidity of anxiety and unipolar mood disorders. Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 377–412. Obrist, P. A. (1981). Cardiovascular psychophysiology: A perspective. New York: Plenum Press. Papillo, J. F., & Shapiro, D. (1990). The cardiovascular system. In L. G. Tassinary & J. T. Cacioppo (Eds.), Principles of psychophysiology: Physical, social, and inferential elements (pp. 456–512). New York: Cambridge University Press. Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, 385–401. Richter, M., & Gendolla, G. H. E. (2006). Incentive effects on cardiovas- cular reactivity in active coping with unclear task difficulty. Interna- tional Journal of Psychophysiology, 61, 216–225. Richter, M., Gendolla, G. H. E., & Krüsken, J. (2006). Context-dependent mood effects on mental effort mobilization: A view from the mood- behavior-model. In A. V. Clark (Ed.), The psychology of moods (pp. 57–79). Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science. Rogers, M. A., Kasai, K., Koji, M., Fukuda, R., Iwanami, A., Nakagome, K., et al. (2004). Executive and prefrontal dysfunction in unipolar depression: A review of neuropsychological and imaging evidence. Neuroscience Research, 50, 1–11. Rosenthal, R. (1978). Combining results of independent studies. Psycho- logical Bulletin, 85, 185–193. Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1992). Effects of optimism on psycho- logical and physical well-being: Theoretical overview and empirical update. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 16, 201–228. Scott, W. D., & Ingram, R. E. (1998). Affective influences in depression: Conceptual issues, cognitive consequences, and multiple mechanisms. In W. F. Flack & J. D. Laird (Eds.), Emotions in psychopathology: Theory and research (pp. 200–215). New York: Oxford University Press. Silvestrini, N., & Gendolla, G. H. E. (2007). Mood effects on autonomic activity in mood regulation. Psychophysiology, 44, 650–659. Smith, T. W., Nealey, J. B., Kircher, J. C., & Limon, J. P. (1997). Social determinants of cardiovascular reactivity: Effect of incentive to exert influence and evaluative threat. Psychophysiology, 43, 65–73. Sobel, M. E. (1982). Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in structural equation models. In S. Leinhart (Ed.), Sociological method- ology (pp. 290–312). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Storey, P. L., Wright, R. A., & Williams, B. J. (1996). Need as a moderator of the difficulty–cardiovascular response relation: The case of fluid deprivation. Journal of Psychophysiology, 10, 228–238. Strauman, T. J. (2002). Self-regulation and depression. Self and Identity, 1, 151–157. Watkins, E., & Brown, R. G. (2002). Rumination and executive function in depression: An experimental study. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 72, 400–402. Weary, G., Edwards, J. A., & Jacobson, J. A. (1995). Depression research methodologies in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology: A reply. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 885–891. Wolf, H. K., Tuomilehto, J., Kuulasmaa, K., Domarkiene, S., Cepaitis, Z., Molarius, A., et al. (1997). Blood pressure levels in the 41 populations of the WHO MONICA project. Journal of Human Hypertension, 11, 733–742. Wright, J. C., & Mischel, W. (1982). Influence of affect on cognitive social learning person variables. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 901–914. Wright, R. A. (1996). Brehm’s theory of motivation as a model of effort and cardiovascular response. In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The psychology of action: Linking cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 424–453). New York: Guilford Press. Wright, R. A., & Dill, J. C. (1993). Blood pressure responses and incentive appraisals as a function of perceived ability and objective task demand. Psychophysiology, 30, 152–160. Wright, R. A., & Franklin, J. (2004). Ability perception determinants of effort-related cardiovascular response: Mood, optimism, and perfor- mance resources. In R. A. Wright, J. Greenberg, & S. S. Brehm (Eds.), Motivational analyses of social behavior: Building on Jack Brehm’s contributions to psychology (pp. 187–204). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Wright, R. A., & Kirby, L. D. (2001). Effort determination of cardiovas- cular response: An integrative analysis with applications in social psy- chology. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psy- chology (Vol. 33, pp. 255–307). New York: Academic Press. Wright, R. A., Murray, J. B., Storey, P. L., & Williams, B. J. (1997). Ability analysis of gender relevance and sex differences in cardiovas- cular response to behavioral challenge. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 205–217. Wyer, R. S., Clore, G. L., & Isbell, L. M. (1999). Affect and information processing. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 31, pp. 1–77). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Received March 29, 2007 Revision received August 1, 2007 Accepted August 6, 2007  157DYSPHORIA AND EFFORT MOBILIZATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .