brown2008.pdf
a6OeRAttKCYgJwcunyzKDQoxf5aK-brown2008.pdf.plain.html

Nuestra Culpa: Collective Guilt and Shame as Predictors of Reparation for Historical Wrongdoing Rupert Brown University of Sussex Roberto González Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile Hanna Zagefka University of London Jorge Manzi Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile Sabina Čehajić University of Sussex Three studies examined the hypothesis that collective guilt and shame have different consequences for reparation. In 2 longitudinal studies, the ingroup was nonindigenous Chileans (Study 1: N  124/120, lag  8 weeks; Study 2: N  247/137, lag  6 months), and the outgroup was Chile’s largest indigenous group, the Mapuche. In both studies, it was found that collective guilt predicted reparation attitudes longitudinally. Collective shame had only cross-sectional associations with reparation and no direct longitudinal effects. In Study 2, collective shame moderated the longitudinal effects of collective guilt such that the effects of guilt were stronger for low-shame respondents. In Study 3 (N  193 nonindig- enous Chileans), the cross-sectional relationships among guilt, shame, and reparation attitudes were replicated. The relationship between shame and reparation attitudes was mediated by a desire to improve the ingroup’s reputation. Keywords: collective guilt, collective shame, reparation Historians of the second half of the 20th century will doubtless come to record that it was marked by several violent intergroup conflicts around the globe. The wars in Southeast Asia, the long struggle against apartheid in South Africa, the genocides in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, and the continuing struggles of indigenous peoples around the world for the restitution of their homelands and the preservation of their cultures are just a few of the many social conflicts that have cost millions of lives over the past 50 years. Although such a record of bloodshed is regrettably hardly a novel phenomenon, one feature of at least some of these conflicts is new and is attracting increasing attention from the social scientific community. That new aspect is the emergence of political debate about people’s felt culpability for injustices per- petrated by their group in those conflicts in the past and the extent to which some restitution should be made to the victims of those injustices in the form of public apologies, memorials, or material reparations (Barkan, 2000; Buruma, 1994; Steele, 1990). This debate has stimulated theorizing and research in social psychology into the phenomenon of self-conscious emotions and their conse- quences for intergroup relations (Branscombe & Doosje, 2004; Leach, Snider, & Iyer, 2002). In this article, we seek to make a contribution to this developing research area by examining the effects of experienced collective ingroup guilt and shame on the desire to make reparations to a “victim” outgroup. We do this in the naturalistic context of relations between the nonindigenous majority and one of the indigenous minority groups in Chile. Reactions to Wrongdoing: The Distinction Between Guilt and Shame In the domain of interpersonal relations, there has been much research into individuals’ emotional reactions to the realization that they have done something in contravention of some relevant personal or normative standards (Tangney & Fischer, 1995). An important point of departure for this work is Lewis’s (1971) distinction between the self-conscious emotions of guilt and of shame. For Lewis, both of these reactions involve negative affect, but the focus of the experience differs: In guilt, the main emphasis is on the wrongdoing and its consequences for the other (“I did this bad thing to X, who suffered as a result”), whereas shame is marked more by a focus on the negative implications of that Rupert Brown and Sabina Čehajić, Department of Psychology, Univer- sity of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom; Roberto González and Jorge Manzi, Escuela de Psicologı́a, Facultad de Ciencias Sociales, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile; Hanna Zagefka, Psychol- ogy Department, Royal Holloway, University of London, London, United Kingdom. This research was supported by Grant 1020954 from the Chilean Na- tional Funding for Scientific and Technological Research program and a grant from the British Council allocated to Roberto González. We grate- fully acknowledge the perceptive comments of Colin Leach and Anja Zimmermann on an earlier version of this article. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Rupert Brown, Department of Psychology, Pevensey 1, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9QH United Kingdom. E-mail: r.brown@sussex.ac.uk Journal of Personality and Social Psychology Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 2008, Vol. 94, No. 1, 75–90 0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.1.75 75 Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . wrongdoing for one’s self-concept (“I did this bad thing to X, and therefore I am [seen to be] a bad person”). Because both emotions are somewhat aversive, people are motivated to alleviate them. Lewis speculated that this alleviation would take different forms. Guilt, with its focus on the misdeed, should be more likely to lead to some form of restitution to the victim (e.g., apology, reparation); shame, with its focus on the self, should lead to withdrawal from or avoidance of the situation that gave rise to it. These ideas provoked considerable empirical research into the role of guilt and shame in interpersonal relations (e.g., Baumeister, Stillwell, & Heatherton, 1994; Tangney & Fischer, 1995). Early on, it was recognized that lay usage of the words guilt and shame often treats them as synonyms (Shaver, Schwartz, Kirson, & O’Connor, 1987). Nevertheless, even if they are interchangeable in ordinary language use, there is growing consensus that, though positively correlated, the two emotions have a different underlying psychology and may sometimes lead to different outcomes. Shame generally seems to be a more intensely and aversively experienced emotion—associated with anger, a desire to hide, and self-oriented counterfactuals—whereas guilt has been observed to correlate more with empathy and action-oriented counterfactuals (Niedenthal, Tangney, & Gavanski, 1994; Tangney, 1991; Tang- ney, Miller, Flicker, & Barlow, 1996; Tangney, Wagner, Fletcher, & Gramzow, 1992). Notably, though, in view of Lewis’s (1971) prediction, there is not always a greater tendency to make repara- tions associated with guilt than there is associated with shame (Roseman, West, & Schwartz, 1994; Tangney et al., 1996). One debated issue has been how to conceptualize shame. Some have followed Lewis’s (1971) lead in regarding shame as the emotion that follows from a negative self-perception, the sense that one’s character is flawed in some respect (e.g., Tangney, 1991). Others, though, have linked shame more to the damage to one’s reputation that may be caused by the public exposure of one’s misdeeds (R. H. Smith, Webster, Parrott, & Eyre, 2002). Although these are subtly different conceptualizations of shame, it is likely that the two components are often closely intertwined. As Mead (1934) noted many years ago, one’s reputation in the eyes of others is a major determinant of one’s self-concept. However, though both accounts predict that shame should still lead to avoidance, it is possible to imagine circumstances in which a temporary coping strategy for dealing with the “reputational” aspect of shame could be to make some kind of public form of restitution if, in so doing, one’s public image could thereby be enhanced. Later in this article, we explore this idea empirically. One other issue concerns the possibility of whether both guilt and shame can be experienced simultaneously and whether they may interact. Lewis (1971, p. 42) suggested that both emotions can be felt at the same time, and others have concurred with this (Tangney, 1991; Tangney et al., 1992). Tangney et al. (1992) also introduced the concept of shame-free guilt and guilt-free shame, the idea that some individuals may be prone to experience guilt but little shame, or vice versa. Tangney et al. (1992) investigated this by using partial correlations among their personality measures of guilt and shame (e.g., guilt-proneness controlling for shame- proneness); an alternative approach could have been to explore whether they interact. In other words, does guilt have stronger associations with reparative tendencies for those who show little shame? If shame has avoidance consequences on social relations generally, it seems plausible to suppose that at high levels it might thereby inhibit the predicted prosocial consequences of guilt, thus suppressing the positive link between guilt and reparation. We return to this issue later. In summary, then, there is some evidence that when people perceive themselves to have behaved illegitimately, they can ex- perience guilt or shame (or both) and that, depending on which predominates, rather different outcomes can occur. Although the evidence is not unequivocal, guilt seems to be more closely con- nected to prosocial orientations and shame to stronger negative self-evaluations, reputational concerns, and various kinds of avoid- ance behavior. Collective Guilt and Collective Shame: Conceptual Issues The discussion above is concerned with the reactions of indi- viduals to the knowledge that they themselves have transgressed in some way, usually toward another individual. However, emotions are not restricted to such interpersonal situations. They can also be felt in response to other people’s misdeeds, particularly if there is some psychological connection with those others—for example, if they belong to the same group (E. R. Smith, 1993). Furthermore, the victims of those misdeeds may be whole categories of people and not just isolated individuals. In short, guilt and shame can have a collective component. The first social psychological study of collective guilt was by Doosje, Branscombe, Spears, and Manstead (1998). Drawing on social identity and self-categorization theories (Tajfel & Turner, 1986; Turner, Hogg, Oakes, Reicher, & Wetherell, 1987), they proposed that, because group memberships and their associated category attributes can become internalized into an individual’s self-concept, it is plausible to assume that the actions of other ingroup members would have affective implications for that indi- vidual. Just as the glorious exploits of some members of our ingroup can lead others of us to bask in reflected glory (Cialdini et al., 1976), so too can the immoral actions of other ingroup mem- bers generate feelings in us of “vicarious” remorse or regret (Lickel, Schmader, Curtis, Scarnier, & Ames, 2005), leaving us cringing in shared blame, as it were. Subsequent theorizing has sought to explicate these self- conscious collective emotions. Following Weiner (1995), Leach et al. (2002) and Branscombe, Slugoski, and Kappen (2004) argued that collective guilt arises mainly when group members perceive that they have some responsibility for their ingroup’s misdeeds or the subsequent repercussions of those misdeeds. In common with the work reviewed in the previous section, most commentators have agreed that collective guilt should lead ingroup members to want to make reparations to the outgroup (Branscombe, Slugoski, & Kappen, 2004; Lickel, Schmader, & Barquissau, 2004). In contrast, collective shame is thought more likely to be in- voked when people do not feel in control of their (ingroup’s) actions and when the ingroup is exposed as being weak or incom- petent (Branscombe, Slugoski, & Kappen, 2004; Lickel et al., 2004). Conceptualizations of collective shame contain the same duality that we noted in discussing individual shame. Branscombe, Slugoski, and Kappen (2004) emphasized the reputational aspect: “[C]ollective shame involves being publicly exposed as incompe- tent, not being in control, weak and potentially even disgusting in the eyes of others” (p. 29). Lickel et al. (2004) added the idea of shame being associated with some negative ingroup “essence” 76 BROWN, GONZÁLEZ, ZAGEFKA, MANZI, AND ČEHAJIĆ Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . (Haslam, Rothschild, & Ernst, 2000; Yzerbyt, Rocher, & Schad- ron, 1997): “[C]ollective shame stems from perceiving that the actions of the ingroup confirm or reveal a flawed aspect of one’s social identity . . . (and) . . . implicate something about the very nature of who they are” (pp. 42–43). As in the case of individual emotions, it seems likely that the negative essence and the repu- tational components of shame will often elide each other. More- over, both viewpoints predict that collective shame, because of the implied threat to the ingroup’s image, should lead to avoidance of the events that gave rise to the feelings in the first place or even to hostility toward the outgroup. In sum, there is some consensus that the primary antecedent of action tendencies toward reparation should be collective guilt rather than collective shame. We do not dissent from this hypothesis, especially as it concerns durable consequences of these two dysphoric emotions. However, we believe that in the short term, both collective guilt and shame can have rather similar and positive associations with reparation attitudes. One reason for this lies in the “reputational” aspect of shame. Insofar as ingroup members can see an immediate possi- bility for improving their group’s image in the eyes of others, endorsing restitutive policies could also be seen to be an expedient strategy for alleviating shame. Over time, though, we suspect that there are likely to be more opportunities to deny feelings and cognitions about the shame-inducing situation, with a consequent reduction in tendencies to repair. What has also not been investigated hitherto, either theoretically or empirically, is whether the emotions of collective guilt and shame might interact. As noted earlier, it is plausible to suppose that group members could feel both emotions simultaneously— certainly, they are usually correlated positively in the interpersonal domain (Shaver et al., 1987; Tangney, 1991). If this assumption is correct, what might be the consequences of feeling guilt with or without shame? Given the above argument, it is possible to predict that a relatively high level of shame, with its likely “avoidance” implications, might inhibit the “normal” prosocial consequences of guilt. Thus, an optimal situation, at least from the perspective of promoting positive intergroup outcomes, should be a combination of relatively high levels of guilt coupled with relatively low levels of shame. Collective Guilt and Collective Shame: Prior Research What empirical research has investigated collective guilt and shame? We focus first on attempts to measure the two concepts. Then we discuss research that has examined the consequences of collective guilt and shame for intergroup attitudes generally and for a desire to make restitution to the outgroup in particular. One widely used measure of collective guilt was published by Branscombe et al. (2004). This consists of five items, four of which refer to expressions of regret or guilt over the ingroup’s negative actions toward other groups, and one of which refers to a desire to make reparations for any damage caused (see also Roc- cas, Klar, & Liviatan, 2004). Collective shame is not assessed by this measure. Although variants of this measure have proven useful in several different intergroup contexts (e.g., Doosje et al., 1998; Pedersen, Beven, Walker, & Griffiths, 2004), we believe it is preferable not to include desire to make reparations in the measure of guilt itself because this is hypothesized to be a consequence of guilt rather than an integral component of it. It also precludes a study of the circumstances, if any, under which shame might predict reparation. Swim and Miller (1999) kept separate their collective guilt scale from their measure of reparation, but again, their scale did not measure collective shame. One study that did attempt to measure both emotions was by Lickel et al. (2005). Participants were asked to recall an event in which they felt guilty or ashamed for the actions of someone else (e.g., family member, ethnic ingroup member) and then to record the emotions that this event evoked. The emotion words guilty, regret, and remorse tended to load together on the same factor and distinctly from the words ashamed, embarrassed, disgraced, and humiliated. Iyer, Schmader, and Lickel (2007) used a similar technique. However, Iyer, Leach, and Crosby (2003) found that ratings of emotions felt when thinking about racial discrimination did not separate so clearly into guilt and shame factors. Instead, emotions like guilty, ashamed, regretful, and blameworthy tended to load together into what Iyer et al. (2003) labeled a guilt factor, whereas sympathetic, compassionate, and empathetic loaded together into a sympathy factor (see also Leach, Iyer, & Pederson, 2006). This inconsistency across studies probably reflects the ambigu- ity in lay usage of the terms guilt and shame, and more theoreti- cally grounded items are needed to distinguish the two concepts. In any event, most existing measures have either not attempted or not been able to clearly differentiate collective shame from collective guilt, and some measures of collective guilt conflate guilt and reparation tendencies. In the studies presented in this article, we report on our efforts to develop distinct and reliable measures for collective guilt and shame and then assess the unique ability of each to predict desire to make reparations to an outgroup. Leaving aside the question of measures used, research has consistently found reliable associations between collective guilt and indicators of intergroup reparation. Doosje et al. (1998, Study 2) presented Dutch student participants with brief historical ac- counts of the Dutch colonial treatment of Indonesia. Despite the fact that this sample of student participants could have had no direct involvement with their country’s past imperialist misadven- tures, they still reported moderate levels of guilt and desire to make compensation, and these two measures were positively correlated. Most other work in this domain has relied on cross-sectional correlational designs and has investigated only collective guilt. Swim and Miller (1999) found that White guilt consistently pre- dicted reparations to African Americans in the form of favorable attitudes toward affirmative action policies and less prejudice toward African Americans. This was confirmed by Iyer et al. (2003), who also found that guilt was only reliably associated with what they called compensatory forms of affirmative action (e.g., special entrance quotas to university, positive job discrimination) and not with equal opportunities policies (e.g., increased efforts to attract more minority applicants to job openings). Elsewhere, McGarty et al. (2005) found that collective guilt felt by nonindig- enous Australians about the treatment of indigenous Australians was associated with support for official government apologies to the indigenous community. To date, little work has attempted to disentangle the potentially divergent intergroup consequences of collective guilt and collec- tive shame. Harvey and Oswald (2000) attempted to induce guilt and shame experimentally in White Americans. However, their manipulation had similar effects on both emotions, and the latter showed similar relationships to the main dependent measure, sup- 77COLLECTIVE GUILT AS A PREDICTOR OF REPARATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . port for Black programs. Lickel et al. (2005) studied the vicarious emotions aroused by a recollection of the misdeeds of friends, family members, or ethnic groups. In line with Lickel at al.’s (2004) model, although shame and guilt were positively correlated with each other, the former emotion was correlated with motives to distance one’s self from the perpetrator or the situation, and the latter was correlated with motives to apologize and repair. More recently, however, Brown and Čehajić (in press) reported two cross-sectional studies in the former Yugoslavia in which both collective guilt and shame were positively related to reparation attitudes. In some recent research set in the context of the current Iraq war, Iyer et al. (2007) examined correlates of action intentions to compensate the Iraqi people for damage caused by the invasion. They found that neither of their measures of general guilt or shame (about the situation in Iraq) predicted compensatory intentions once anger (about the same situation) was controlled. In fact, in both of their studies, Iyer et al. (2007) found the latter emotion to be the most potent correlate of compensation intentions. Leach et al. (2006) also examined the roles of guilt and anger in the context of political action in Australia over the plight of Aboriginal people there. Although they found that collective guilt was associated with compensation attitudes even when controlling for anger, anger proved a stronger predictor of actual willingness to act to effect that compensation. In the present Study 3, we examined this possible role of anger in guilt- and shame-arousing contexts. In summary, then, several studies have shown that collective guilt is associated with tendencies to apologize and make restitu- tion to the outgroup. With three exceptions (Doosje et al., 1998; Harvey & Oswald, 2000; Iyer et al., 2003, Study 2), these have relied on cross-sectional correlational data, with all the usual interpretative difficulties about causation that that implies. Little research has sought to investigate the consequences of both col- lective guilt and collective shame in the same study. Such an omission is surprising in view of the clearly divergent predictions about the effects of guilt and shame that have been made. In the first two studies presented here, we looked to fill these lacunae by conducting longitudinal research into the effects of collective guilt and collective shame on reparation. Measuring both independent and dependent variables at two points in time makes some infer- ences of causality possible (Bijleveld & Van der Kamp, 1998; Cook & Campbell, 1979; Finkel, 1995). The research was set in the context of the relationship between indigenous and nonindig- enous groups in Chile, a hitherto underresearched locale in social psychology and one that is especially appropriate for studying the effects of the particular group-based emotions with which we are concerned in this article. Chilean Research Context Chile consists of a majority of nonindigenous Chileans (around 16 million) and several indigenous groups, of which the largest and most culturally significant is the Mapuche (around 0.8 million). The Mapuche have fought against invasions of their territory for over 3 centuries and were finally defeated only in the late 19th century. Since then, the Mapuche have suffered further infringe- ments of their land rights, suppression of their culture (e.g., their language was outlawed under Pinochet’s military regime, 1973– 1989), and severe economic and social deprivation. Recently, they have become more active in protesting their conditions, which has sometimes culminated in violent clashes with agents of the state or private employers. Nonindigenous Chileans have rather ambiva- lent feelings toward the Mapuche (Saiz, 2002). On the one hand, the Mapuche are characterized (e.g., in school books) as brave and fearless warriors, a part of the “founding myth” of the Chilean nation, and, as such, a source of pride for nonindigenous Chileans. On the other hand, Mapuche unemployment and alcoholism rates are disproportionately high in comparison with those of other groups in Chile, which makes them a ready target of negative attitudes from the majority. Furthermore, in recent years, there has been a public debate about nonindigenous people’s group-based culpability and responsibility for treatment of the Mapuche in the past and the possible need for reparations. This debate has been translated into official state action, with the Chilean government establishing a body for the improvement of the Mapuche’s situa- tion (Instituto Nacionalde Estadı́stica, 2002; Ministerio de Plani- ficación y Cooperación, 2003). Thus, issues of group-based guilt, shame, responsibility, and reparations are likely to be quite salient with regard to the Mapuche in nonindigenous people’s minds. Hypotheses Here, we develop our principal hypotheses. The first hypothesis (H1) is that feelings of collective guilt held by nonindigenous Chileans over the historical mistreatment of the Mapuche will be causally related to attitudes in favor of making reparations to the Mapuche.1 This implies that prior feelings of guilt should longi- tudinally predict reparation attitudes. We now turn to the possible effects of collective shame: The- oretically, as we have shown, shame should be less strongly and less durably related to reparation. It is possible that in the short term, there may be a positive association with reparation attitudes, but we hypothesize that this will not translate into a longitudinal causal relationship because of its essential ingroup focus. Instead, as argued earlier, we believe that shame could interact with col- lective guilt to inhibit the latter’s usual prosocial consequences. Thus, the second hypothesis (H2) proposes a moderation of the guilt–reparation relationship by shame such that high-shame re- spondents will show a weaker relationship between guilt and reparation than will low-shame respondents. Study 1 Method Participants One hundred twenty-four nonindigenous secondary school stu- dents from the Temuco region in Chile participated in the survey (55 boys, 69 girls; age: M  15.47 years). For 120 of these participants, data were collected at two points in time with a time lag of approximately 8 weeks. 1 The use of causal terminology here must, of course, be understood in the context of the correlational designs of our studies. Although the longitudinal designs of Studies 1 and 2 permit stronger causal inferences than do cross-sectional designs, definitive statements about causality should be made cautiously. 78 BROWN, GONZÁLEZ, ZAGEFKA, MANZI, AND ČEHAJIĆ Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . Procedure and Measures Data were collected in Temuco, a city several hundred kilome- ters to the south of Santiago, in an area in which the proportion of the Mapuche population is very large. During school class time, all participants filled out a questionnaire in Spanish that contained the measures of the independent and dependent variables, as translated below. The questionnaires distributed at both points in time were virtually identical. Participation was voluntary and took place with parental and student written consent. At the conclusion of the study, all participants were debriefed. Collective guilt and shame. Collective guilt was measured by asking participants how much they agreed (or disagreed) with four statements concerning the nonindigenous people’s current or his- torical treatment of the Mapuche (see Table 1). Collective shame was measured by inviting agreement (or disagreement) with three statements that attributed the cause of the nonindigenous group’s mistreatment of the Mapuche to some internal factor (see Table 1). Preliminary factor analysis of these seven items (with the principal axis method of extraction) with a larger (N  359) but equivalent sample of nonindigenous students at Time 1 (T1) confirmed that the guilt and shame items did indeed load on separate, if correlated (.41), factors.2 In the obtained solution with oblimin rotation, all four guilt items loaded on the first factor (loadings: .57–.91) but not on the second factor (loadings:  .30), and the three shame items loaded on the second factor (loadings: .47–.89) but not on the first factor (loadings:  .30). The two resulting scales had adequate internal reliabilities (s  .77 and .67 for guilt and shame, respectively). Reparation. Desire to make reparation to the Mapuche was measured with five items that addressed issues of providing resti- tution to the Mapuche or of reducing their social exclusion (see Table 1). This scale had satisfactory internal reliability (  .75). Prejudice toward the Mapuche. We felt it was important to control for participants’ initial attitudes toward the Mapuche in view of previous research indicating correlation between guilt and prejudice (Swim & Miller, 1999) and between prejudice and compensatory attitudes (Leach et al., 2006). Therefore, a prejudice measure was also included. This measure consisted of nine items taken or adapted from racism measures used in other contexts (e.g., Lepore & Brown, 1997; Pettigrew & Meertens, 1995; see Table 1). This scale had good reliability (  .81). One reviewer suggested that this prejudice scale might be empirically indistinguishable from our measure of collective shame. In fact, this proved not to be the case. A factor analysis of the shame and prejudice items (principal axis method of extraction with oblimin rotation) con- firmed that the shame items loaded together on the same factor (loadings: .49–.70) and not on either of the two factors that comprised the prejudice scale (all cross-loadings:  .30). And the shame factor was correlated only weakly with the two prejudice factors (.20 to .28), which were themselves moderately corre- lated with each other (.47). Moreover, in the matched sample that was used for the main analyses, shame and prejudice were again only weakly correlated (see Table 2). It seems clear, then, that shame and prejudice were indeed clearly separable constructs. All of the above items used a 5-point response format (1  completely agree, 5  completely disagree) and were recoded so that a high score indicated a high value of the construct in question. In addition, various demographic details (e.g., age, gender) of participants were recorded. Results We present the findings in three sections. First, we present the results from cross-sectional analyses of the T1 and Time (T2) samples, considered separately. This shows the pattern of contem- poraneous associations among our primary variables. In the second section, we present the results of the longitudinal analyses, in which we sought to establish the power of collective guilt (and shame) to predict reparation attitudes at T2, as predicted by H1, and also to test the moderation hypothesis (H2). Finally, as in any cross-lagged panel design, we explored the possible existence of “reverse” or circular causal processes—namely, that prior repara- tion attitudes might influence subsequent feelings of collective guilt and shame. Cross-Sectional Analyses The means and intercorrelations of the principal measures are presented in Table 2. From that table, it can be seen that respon- dents showed moderate levels of reparation, guilt, and shame (all around the midpoint of the scale) and rather low levels of prejudice toward the Mapuche. From the upper right quadrant of Table 2, it can be seen that, as expected, collective guilt and shame are positively correlated with each other, and both are positively associated with reparation attitudes. To examine their independent associations at T1, we regressed reparation attitudes onto guilt and shame, and, in a subsequent step, the interaction term between these predictors. The main predictors were centered prior to analysis. To be sure that these were relatively “clean” estimates of the links between collective guilt, collective shame, and reparation, we first controlled respon- dents’ age and level of prejudice. This multiple regression ex- plained a reasonable amount of the variance (R2  .48), F(5, 118)  21.74, p  .001, in which the only reliable predictors were guilt (  .34, p  .001) and shame (  .40, p  .001). Thus, both guilt and shame were positively associated with reparation attitudes in this cross-sectional analysis. Contrary to H2, the in- teraction term was not reliable (  .05, p  .50). At T2, the same regression analysis produced a very similar outcome: (R2  .55), F(5, 115)  28.12, p  .001. Once again, both guilt and shame were reliable and positive predictors of reparation attitudes (  .47 and .29, respectively; both ps  .001). At this time point, prejudice was also a reliable correlate of reparation attitudes (  .20, p  .01). The Guilt  Shame interaction was again nonsignificant (  .03, p  .70). Longitudinal Analysis Inspection of the left-hand columns of Table 2 reveals very little change in the mean levels of the variables. In fact, only shame showed a significant reduction over time, F(1, 120)  5.21, p  2 This sample comprised a different group of nonindigenous school students who were taking part in a study closely related to the one reported here. The larger sample size permitted a statistically robust analysis of the factorial structure of the guilt and shame items. 79COLLECTIVE GUILT AS A PREDICTOR OF REPARATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . Table 1 Items of Principal Measures Measure Studies 1 and 2 Study 3 Collective guilt I feel guilty for what we, the Non-Indigenous Chileans, have done to the Mapuche in the past When I think about the racism that exists towards the Mapuche, I feel guilty to be a “Non-Indigenous” Chilean To think how we “Non-Indigenous” Chileans have stolen the Mapuche lands makes me guilty I feel guilty when I realize that we “Non-Indigenous” Chileans have contributed to the loss of Mapuche language and customs I feel guilty for the manner in which the Mapuche have been treated in the past by “Non-Indigenous” Chileans When I think how “Non-Indigenous” have stolen the Mapuche lands, I feel guilty I feel very bad when I realize what we the “Non-Indigenous” Chileans have contributed to the loss of Mapuche language and customs Sometimes I feel guilty for the things that “Non-Indigenous” Chileans have done to the Mapuche When I think what “Non-Indigenous” Chileans have done to the Mapuche, I feel guilty Even if I have done nothing bad, I feel guilty for the behaviour of “Non-Indigenous” Chileans toward the Mapuche I feel guilty for the bad living conditions of the Mapuche To think how we “Non-Indigenous” Chileans show intolerance, by refusing to offer job contracts to Mapuche people, makes me feel guilty Collective shame Due to the long history of discrimination against the Mapuche, I think that we “Non-Indigenous” Chileans are predisposed to be racist When I think of the manner in which the Mapuche have been treated, I sometimes think that we “Non- Indigenous” Chileans are racist and mean Even though I do not discriminate against the Mapuche, I feel bad when I realize that other “Non-Indigenous” Chileans do I feel bad because the behavior of “Non-Indigenous” Chileans towards the Mapuche people has created a bad image in the eyes of the world I feel bad when I see an international report on the treatment received by the Mapuche on the part of “Non-Indigenous” Chileans Sometimes it shames me how others can think for the manner in which we have harmed the Mapuche To think how Chile is seen for its treatment of the Mapuche makes me feel ashamed I feel humiliated when I think of the negative manner that Chile is seen by the rest of the world for how it has treated the Mapuche I feel shame when I think how “Non-Indigenous” Chileans have behaved towards the Mapuche I feel ashamed to be a “Non-Indigenous” Chilean for the way we have treated the Mapuche I feel ashamed for the damage done to the Mapuche by “Non-Indigenous” Chileans I feel ashamed for the racist tendency of “Non-Indigenous” Chileans It shames me when I realize that “Non-Indigenous” Chileans could be intolerant by nature Reparation attitude I feel that the Mapuche should have economic benefits as a reparation for the damage that we’ve caused them I feel that the Mapuche should have economic benefits as a reparation for the damage that we’ve caused them Our government should apologize for all the maltreatment and deprivation that we’ve caused to the Mapuche Our government should apologize for all the maltreatment and deprivation that we’ve caused to the Mapuche I would like my school to have more materials (books, magazines, musical instruments, etc.) that would allow us to have a better understanding of the history and culture of the Mapuche I would like my school to have more class materials (books, magazines, musical instruments, etc.) that would allow us to have a better understanding of the history and culture of the Mapuche I would like our country to be more tolerant and to have a good relationship between the Mapuche and “Non- Indigenous” Chileans I would like our country to be more tolerant and to have a good relationship between the Mapuche and “Non- Indigenous” Chileans I think that in recent times the media have devoted too much space to speak ill of the Mapuche I think that in recent times the media have devoted too much space to speak ill of the Mapuche Chilean universities should have special scholarships for Mapuche students When they offer work, private companies should guarantee positions to Mapuche people 80 BROWN, GONZÁLEZ, ZAGEFKA, MANZI, AND ČEHAJIĆ Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . .05. Still, changes in mean levels are not very informative for testing our hypotheses about the longitudinal influence of guilt and shame on reparation. To examine this, we regressed T2 reparation on T1 guilt, shame, and their interaction term, controlling for initial levels of reparation (Bijleveld & Van der Kamp, 1998; Finkel, 1995). As before, age and initial prejudice levels were added as controls. This longitudinal analysis also explained a respectable propor- tion of the variance in the criterion measure (R2  .37), F(6, 114)  11.19, p  .001. There were just two significant effects: As expected, the test–retest association for reparation was significant (  .43, p  .001). The only other effect was for guilt, which was, as predicted by H1, a positive predictor of T2 reparation attitudes (  .20, p  .05). In contrast, the main effect for shame was far from being significant (  .03, p  .80). Contrary to H2, there was no significant Guilt  Shame interaction (  .12, p  .20). Reverse Causal Direction As we have just shown, there is evidence that collective guilt does indeed have a causal relationship in predicting reparation attitudes. However, it is possible that a circular relationship exists such that prior reparation attitudes might have an influence on subsequent levels of guilt. To examine this possibility, we reversed the logic of the longitudinal analysis in the previous section. This time, we regressed T2 guilt on T1 reparation attitudes and shame, controlling for T1 values of guilt. As before, age and prejudice Table 1 (continued) Measure Studies 1 and 2 Study 3 Prejudice I would be bothered if most of my classmates were Mapuche I would be concerned if my teacher or boss was Mapuche I would feel uncomfortable sitting next to a Mapuche person on a bus Mapuche people should be marginalized in Chilean society If I would meet a Mapuche person in the street, I would feel tense and nervous Sometimes I think that this country would be better off with fewer Mapuche The Mapuche exaggerate their problems to get help The Mapuche’s problems are due to themselves The Mapuche receive more help from the government than they really deserve Anger Sometimes I feel angry when I think what my group has done to Mapuche people in the past Thinking about how my group has treated Mapuche people makes me feel angry Talking about the past and the issues regarding the treatment of Mapuche people by my group makes me angry Reputation management I would like to improve the image of Chile in the rest of the world in respect of how we treat indigenous peoples I believe we should restore the international reputation of Chile associated with the treatment of indigenous peoples I would like other people to have a better impression of Chile as a country in relation to how we have treated indigenous peoples I want other countries to respect us again for the way we treat indigenous people I believe that it is important that Chile is seen in a more favorable manner by the rest of the world in relation to indigenous issues If we do not resolve the outstanding issues about the indigenous people in Chile, it will damage us as a country If we do not change our attitude towards indigenous people, the international image of Chile will become negative In order for Chile to improve, it should address the indigenous issues The reputation that Chile has at an international level depends to a large extent on the treatment that we give to the indigenous peoples Image threat appraisal I consider that our image as Chileans has been negatively affected by the way we have addressed Mapuche issues Sometimes I believe that Chile has lost respect for the way it has dealt with Mapuche issues Due to the way we have addressed the Mapuche issues, I believe that now people judge Chileans negatively 81COLLECTIVE GUILT AS A PREDICTOR OF REPARATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . level were added as controls. This analysis also accounted for respectable amounts of variance in the dependent measure (R2  .42), F(5, 115)  16.91, p  .001. There were three significant effects: Trivially, T1 guilt was a strong predictor (  .58, p  .001), T1 reparation predicted T2 guilt (  .35, p  .001), and T1 shame also predicted T2 guilt (  .24, p  .02). A parallel analysis regressing T2 shame on T1 values of the other variables also yielded a good fit (R2  .33), F(5, 115)  11.26, p  .001. In this analysis, the test–retest association of shame was reliable (  .40, p  .001), as were the associations with T1 reparation (  .27, p  .02) and prejudice (  .22, p  .01). Discussion There are several noteworthy features of this study. First, as predicted by H1, collective guilt did indeed have a longitudinal effect on reparation attitudes. Because our analysis controlled for initial levels of reparation (Finkel, 1995), there is some basis for inferring a causal relationship between guilt and reparation. To our knowledge, this is the first time that this has been demonstrated longitudinally in a field setting, although, of course, several other cross-sectional studies have found similar results (Iyer et al., 2003; McGarty et al., 2005; Swim & Miller, 1999). Second, collective shame appeared to have no direct causal link to reparation attitudes because the beta value in the longitudinal analysis was effectively zero. This stands in stark contrast to the longitudinal effect of guilt. However, the collective shame measure cannot be dismissed as simply an unreliable or impotent variable, because it was a signif- icant predictor of reparation attitudes in both the T1 and T2 cross-sectional analyses. Thus, in the short term, it appears that collective shame can be “alleviated” in the same way as collective guilt, by increasing endorsement of reparation attitudes. Its longer term effects are rather different however. That said, there were some unexpected findings. First, it was interesting that there seemed to be some “circular causality” at work because initial reparation attitudes also predicted subsequent guilt and shame. In retrospect, this may not be so surprising. This study may have represented one of the first formal instances in which these adolescent nonindigenous Chileans had been ques- tioned about both their group’s potential culpability for the histor- ical treatment of the Mapuche and what might be done about that. It is not implausible to imagine that having to answer questions about whether the Chilean government should apologize and make restitution to the Mapuche might have instigated individual and social rumination about the ingroup’s collective guilt. Given the relatively short time lag of this study (8 weeks), the more the participants thought about and endorsed reparation attitudes ini- tially, the greater could have been their feelings of collective guilt and shame later on. The question of whether such circular causal effects would still be visible over a longer time period is interest- ing. A second issue concerns the absence of any moderation of the longitudinal effects of guilt on reparation by shame, as predicted by H2. Apart from the inherent statistical difficulty in detecting interactions in correlational designs (McClelland & Judd, 1993), the substantive reason for this is not clear, although, again, we speculate that it may have to do with the relatively short time span of this longitudinal design. As we showed, contemporaneously, shame had a positive association with reparation. It is possible that this positive association persisted long enough for the predicted inhibition effect on guilt not to manifest itself but not long enough to produce any reliable longitudinal effect for shame per se. In a second study, we examined this possibility by introducing a much longer time lag. Study 2 Study 2 was a close replication of Study 1, with one critical difference. Instead of the relatively short time lag of 8 weeks, we wanted to determine whether the longitudinal effects of guilt on reparation would persist for a much longer period—6 months. If this was the case, this would have important theoretical implica- tions because it would provide evidence for the robustness of the consequences of collective guilt. In addition, we sought to reex- amine the hypothesized inhibitory consequences of shame over this same longer time period. Method Participants Two hundred and forty-seven nonindigenous secondary school students from the Temuco area participated in the T1 data collec- tion (119 boys, 127 girls, 1 unspecified; age: M  16.02 years). Of these, 137 also participated at T2, approximately 6 months later. This relatively heavy attrition rate was due in part to the more ambitious time lag, but it was also because the two data-collection points straddled the end and the beginning of the academic year in Chile, with consequent losses of students for administrative rea- sons (e.g., some students changing schools or repeating the year). Nevertheless, as we report below, the complete panel sample did not seem to differ much from the respondents who dropped out Table 2 Study 1: Means and Intercorrelations Among Principal Variables Variable MT1 SD MT2 SD 1 2 3 4 1. Reparation 3.52 0.86 3.48 0.83 .57 .59/.66 .62/.60 .24/.34 2. Guilt 2.96 1.03 2.89 1.04 .46 .59 .58/.57 .15/.15 3. Shame 3.62 0.91 3.40 1.01 .41 .28 .45 .25/.26 4. Prejudice 2.31 0.78 2.35 0.88 .20 .17 .32 .51 Note. For all correlations of r  20, coefficients on or below the diagonal in bold type are Time 1 (T1) and Time 2 (T2) correlations (e.g., from T1 values of variables in column 1 to T2 values of variables in top row). Above the diagonal are cross-sectional correlations at T1/T2 (r  .20, p  .05; r  .25, p  .01; r  .32, p  .00). 82 BROWN, GONZÁLEZ, ZAGEFKA, MANZI, AND ČEHAJIĆ Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . after T1, thus giving us some confidence that it was reasonably representative of the original sample. Procedure and Measures The procedure and measures were identical to those of Study 1. The measures all had adequate or good internal reliabilities: col- lective guilt (  .79), collective shame (  .64), reparation (  .72), and prejudice (  .76). As in Study 1, preliminary factor analysis (principal axis method of extraction) with another larger (N  376) but equivalent sample of nonindigenous participants confirmed the distinctiveness of our collective guilt and shame measures. Factor analysis with oblimin rotation produced the same two-factor solution as in Study 1, with guilt items loading on the first factor (loadings: .58–.89) but not on the second factor (load- ings:  .30), whereas shame items loaded on the second factor (loadings: .69–.86) but not on the first factor (loadings:  .30). The correlation between the factors was .45. We again checked on the separability of the shame and prejudice measures. A factor analysis of the shame and prejudice items (principal axis method of extraction with oblimin rotation) showed that the shame items loaded together on the same factor (loadings: .52–.77) and not on either of the two factors that comprised the prejudice scale (all cross-loadings:  .30). The shame factor was correlated only weakly with the two prejudice factors (.23–.23), which were themselves moderately intercorrelated (.44). In the matched sam- ple that was used for the main analyses, shame and prejudice were only weakly associated (see Table 3). Once again, it is apparent that shame and prejudice were clearly separable constructs. Results The results are presented in four sections. First, we report on the effects of the panel attrition. Then we report cross-sectional anal- yses from T1 and T2. Then we report on the main longitudinal analysis in which H1 and H2 were tested. Finally, we check on any reverse causal links. Panel Attrition To assess the representativeness of our full panel sample (with data at both time points), we compared this sample with those for whom we had data only at T1. One-way analyses of variance on all the measures revealed no significant differences between the full longitudinal sample and those who dropped out after T1. In only one respect did the two samples differ: In the longitudinal sample, there was a slightly lower proportion of boys than there were in the T1-only sample (43% vs. 55%), 2(1)  3.99, p  .05. This minor difference aside, it seems safe to assume that the full panel was reasonably representative of the original sample. Cross-Sectional Analyses at T1 and T2 Means and intercorrelations of the main variables are shown in Table 3. From there, it can be seen that the mean levels of reparation, guilt, shame, and prejudice were all very comparable to those in Study 1. The upper right quadrant of Table 3 shows that, as in Study 1, collective guilt and shame were positively correlated with each other, and both were positively associated with repara- tion attitudes. To examine their independent associations at T1, we once again regressed reparation attitudes onto guilt and shame and, in a further step, the two-way interaction between them. As before, we first controlled respondents’ age and level of prejudice and centered the main predictors. The final regression model accounted for a rea- sonable proportion of the observed variance (R2  .43), F(5, 231)  35.22, p  .001. Mirroring the results from Study 1, the only reliable predictors were guilt (  .41, p  .001), shame (  .24, p  .001), and the control variable prejudice level (  .35, p  .001). Thus, both guilt and shame were positively associated with reparation attitudes in this cross-sectional analysis. The interaction term was not reliable (  .02, p  .70). The same regressions at T2 produced a similar outcome (R2  .40), F(5, 126)  16.97, p  .001. As before, both guilt and shame were reliable predictors of reparation attitudes (s  .40 and .23, respectively; ps  .001 and .01, respectively). Prejudice was also a reliable correlate of reparation attitudes (  .34, p  .001). The Guilt  Shame interaction was again nonsignificant (  .07, p  .40). Longitudinal Analyses Inspection of the T1 and T2 means in Table 3 reveals that there was little change in mean levels of the variables over time. The only significant change was for shame, F(1, 136)  4.14, p  .05. To test our hypotheses, we regressed reparation attitudes at T2 onto T1 values of guilt, shame, their interaction term, and age and prejudice level, controlling for initial reparation attitudes. This regression model accounted for an adequate proportion of the variance (R2  .24), F(6, 126)  6.68, p  .001. Apart from the test–retest value for reparation (  .38, p  .001), the only significant effects were the hypothesized (H1) main effect for guilt (  .22, p  .04) and the hypothesized (H2) Guilt  Shame Table 3 Study 2: Means and Intercorrelations Among Principal Variables Variable MT1 SD MT2 SD 1 2 3 4 1. Reparation 3.44 0.99 3.44 0.99 .40 .58/.55 .50/.48 .35/.43 2. Guilt 2.98 1.00 2.91 1.01 .39 .46 .52/.49 .21/.20 3. Shame 3.69 0.98 3.53 0.97 .30 .24 .47 .23/.29 4. Prejudice 2.32 0.82 2.40 0.82 .19 .01 .20 .46 Note. For T2 and T1-T2 correlations, r  19; coefficients on or below the diagonal in bold type are Time 1 (T1) and Time 2 (T2) correlations (e.g., from T1 values of variables in column 1 to T2 values of variables in top row). Above the diagonal are cross-sectional correlations at T1/T2. For correlations in bold type, r  .19, p  .05; r  .24, p  .01; and r  .30, p  .001. For T1 correlations (with larger degrees of freedom), all are significant at p  .001. 83COLLECTIVE GUILT AS A PREDICTOR OF REPARATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . interaction (  .20, p  .02). The coefficient for shame was far from significant (  .07, p  .50). Following Aiken and West’s (1991) suggestion, we plotted the Guilt  Shame interaction by applying the regression equation to a combination of two values of guilt and shame (1 standard deviation below the mean and 1 standard deviation above the mean, labeled low and high, respec- tively). The results, which are presented in Figure 1, indicate that the longitudinal effect of guilt on reparation increased at lower levels of shame, as predicted by H2. Reverse Causal Direction Confirming Study 1 and supporting H1, collective guilt ap- peared to be causally related to reparation attitudes. What about the opposite pathway over this longer time period? As before, we regressed T2 guilt on T1 reparation attitudes and shame, control- ling for T1 values of guilt (with age and prejudice level again included as controls). This analysis also accounted for variance in the dependent measure (R2  .23), F(5, 127)  7.50, p  .001. However, there was only one reliable beta coefficient, the unsur- prising test–retest value for guilt (  .48, p  .001). All other coefficients were far from significant (all ps  .10). A parallel analysis regressing T2 shame on T1 values of the other variables also yielded a significant overall regression equation (R2  .27), F(5, 127)  9.29, p  .001, and, again, only the test–retest association of shame was reliable (  .45, p  .001). All other coefficients were nonsignificant (all ps  .11). Thus, in this study, there was little evidence of circular causality from initial repara- tion to later feelings of guilt or shame. Discussion This study provided a striking confirmation of our hypotheses. First, despite the threefold increase in time lag, guilt was still significantly predictive of later reparation attitudes, even when controlling for initial reparation attitudes. This supports H1. Sec- ond, and supporting H2, this direct link was moderated by collec- tive shame such that it held reliably only for those respondents reporting low initial levels of collective shame. For high-shame participants, the otherwise positive consequences of guilt seem to have been suppressed, suggesting, as we had suspected from the outset, that collective guilt and shame have rather different con- sequences for people’s desire to make restitution for their in- group’s past misdeeds. The effects of collective shame observed in Study 1 were also mirrored here. As before, it proved to have little direct long-term effect on reparation attitudes. Its only reliable and independent association was in the cross-sectional analyses. A possible expla- 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 4.00 Low Guilt High Guilt R ep ar at io n Low Shame High shame Figure 1. Shame moderating the longitudinal relationship between guilt and reparation in Study 2. 84 BROWN, GONZÁLEZ, ZAGEFKA, MANZI, AND ČEHAJIĆ Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . nation for this correlation is that it reflects the genuine, if short- term, consequence of feeling collectively shameful about the in- group’s misdeeds. As we speculated earlier, it is possible that shame might be temporarily alleviated by attempting to make reparations, but this lessening is only temporary because of the underlying negative attribution that shame implies. Such an attri- bution means that longer term relief is more likely to be gained from avoidance strategies; hence, the inhibition of the longitudinal guilt–reparation relationship for high-shame people. Though the findings of Study 2 largely confirmed those of Study 1, there was one important difference in the pattern of results observed. This concerns the absence of any reverse path between reparation and guilt as compared with that found in Study 1. Here, the difference in time lags between the two studies also seems a plausible explanation for the inconsistency. The argument ad- vanced earlier for the reparation–guilt causal link was that being asked to reflect on reparation issues at T1 might have instigated increased feelings of guilt in the minds of the nonindigenous participants. Such a reflexive process may have been less likely over the 6-month duration of the second study, especially as that time gap also involved changes in school classes and likely other significant events in the lives of our adolescent participants. If the apparently unidirectional causal link that we observed in Study 2 is confirmed in further research over longer periods, it will add strength to the reasoning behind the hypothesis that predicted it. Finally, we acknowledge the undesirably high attrition rate and the consequent loss of statistical power in our longitudinal analy- ses. Although we had designed the study to be substantially larger, for administrative and other reasons outside of our control, we did lose many more participants than we had wished. Still, despite the attrition, it seems that the full panel sample did not differ substan- tially from the originally conceived one, and the findings it yielded were reasonably clear-cut. Study 3 In Studies 1 and 2, we showed that guilt, but not shame, has reliable longitudinal main effects on reparation attitudes. This was entirely consistent with theoretical expectations. Somewhat less expected, though, were the equally reliable cross-sectional positive correlations between collective shame and reparation attitudes. In Study 3, we investigated what might be underlying those associ- ations. While doing so, we also took the opportunity to refine our key measures in order to improve their validity and internal reli- ability. Earlier, it was noted how conceptualizations of collective shame have included two aspects. One stresses the perception of some negative ingroup “essence” that might be to blame for the immoral actions of ingroup members (Lickel et al., 2004), and the other focuses more on how the public reputation of the ingroup might have been damaged by those same reprehensible deeds of its members (Branscombe et al., 2004). In practice, as we noted earlier, we suspect that these two components will often be closely associated because the awareness of a besmirched ingroup repu- tation in the eyes of others may well lead to a similar negative perception of the ingroup by its members. Still, insofar as collec- tive shame does involve such reputational aspects, this does imply that one strategy for coping with it is to manage the ingroup’s reputation by appearing to endorse some restitution to the out- group. A contemporary illustration of this process at work was provided by Ken Livingston, mayor of London. Commenting on the 200th anniversary of the abolition of slavery in Britain, Mayor Livingston said, “A British state that refuses to apologise for a crime on such a gigantic scale as the slave trade merely lowers our country in the opinion of the world” (“Marching to London to Hear a Single Word,” 2007). Research support for this image-management consequence of shame was found by Schmader and Lickel (2006). They asked Hispanic participants to identify an event in which a member of their group had done something to confirm a negative stereotype about Hispanics. Feelings of shame about that event were corre- lated with a desire to repair the image of the ingroup. Such a strategy may be particularly efficacious in the short term—that is, when confronted with investigators presenting questionnaire items concerning reparation attitudes—because it so easily serves what we believe to be its self- (and ingroup-) presentational needs. However, such a strategy may be more costly, and hence less likely to be adopted, over a longer period of time. A more likely longer term strategy for reducing shame feelings might be denial or other forms of social or cognitive avoidance. If this analysis is correct, then it would explain why it is possible to observe positive shame–reparation associations cross-sectionally (the present Stud- ies 1 and 2; see also Brown & Čehajić, in press; Harvey & Oswald, 2000) but not longitudinally. One further implication is that such a shame–reparation link might be mediated by a desire to protect or improve the ingroup’s image in the eyes of others. Study 3 was designed to explore this hypothesis of mediation of the shame– reparation cross-sectional association. As noted earlier, Iyer et al. (2007) and Leach et al. (2006) have suggested that guilt might be a less important predictor of com- pensatory intentions than is anger. Indeed, Iyer et al. (2007) found that the effects of both guilt and shame disappeared once anger was controlled. To determine whether anger could also account for the guilt–reparation and shame–reparation associations we have observed, we included a measure of anger in Study 3. In Studies 1 and 2, the measure of collective shame tapped mainly the negative ingroup essence component of shame. More- over, the items comprising it (deliberately) eschewed the words shame or ashamed because we wanted to avoid semantic overlap with the items comprising the guilt scale. Although we were successful in the latter aim, it has to be conceded that the reliability of the three-item shame measure was suboptimal and may also have lacked some face validity. Thus, a second goal of Study 3 was to enlarge and improve the measure of collective shame. We sought to do this in four ways: First, we added items that captured more directly the reputational aspect of the emotion. Second, we incorporated the key emotion words shame, ashamed, and humil- iated and tied them specifically to the “negative essence” and reputational concepts. Third, we focused more directly on felt emotions. In the earlier version of the scale, it might be argued, there was some conflation of the appraisal aspect of emotion— “When I think of the manner in which the Mapuche have been treated, I think that we . . . are predisposed to be racist”—with the emotion of shame itself. In this improved version, therefore, we made feelings of shame (and associated emotions) absolutely explicit and distinct from mere appraisals of threats to the in- group’s image. Fourth, we increased the range and number of items dealing with the historical mistreatment of indigenous peo- 85COLLECTIVE GUILT AS A PREDICTOR OF REPARATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . ples in Chile. At the same time, we also aimed to improve the internal reliabilities of the guilt and reparation measures, and we included some additional measures to check for alternative inter- pretations of the observed effects. The hypotheses of this cross-sectional study were as follows: 1. On the basis of Studies 1 and 2 and other empirical work (e.g., Harvey & Oswald, 2000), we predicted that both collective guilt and shame would be independently and positively associated with reparation attitudes. 2. We predicted that the shame–reparation link would be mediated by a desire to improve the ingroup’s public reputation. Method Participants Participants were 193 students (undergraduate and preunder- graduate induction) at a university in Santiago, Chile (91 male, 93 female, 9 unspecified; age: M  16.89 years, range  14–34 years), who agreed to take part on a voluntary basis. Procedure Participants filled out the questionnaire in Spanish during class time. The questionnaire was described as being a study of social attitudes and began with a brief introductory paragraph that re- ferred to the historical conflicts between the Mapuche and the nonindigenous groups over land, culture, and language issues. Participants then filled out the questionnaire. Following comple- tion of the questionnaire, participants were debriefed. Measures Collective guilt. This measure comprised eight items. Three of these items were from Studies 1 and 2 (or were close approxima- tions thereof), and five were new (see Table 1). Together, these eight items produced a highly reliable scale (  .93). Collective shame. This measure comprised 10 items, all of which explicitly tapped emotions related to the different facets of shame (see Table 1). These 10 items also made a highly reliable scale (  .93). Appraisal of image threat. A separate scale specifically mea- suring appraisals of the threat to the ingroup’s image rather than the actual emotions caused by those appraisals was devised from three items (see Table 1;   .75). Reparation attitudes. This scale comprised the five original items together with two new ones (see Table 1). It also had a satisfactory internal reliability (  .86). Reputation management. This was a new scale that tapped a concern with and a desire to improve the reputation of the ingroup (nonindigenous Chileans). It consisted of nine items (see Table 1). This scale had very good internal reliability (  .91). Anger. Three items tapped participants’ anger at the past mis- treatment of the Mapuche (see Table 1). These formed a reliable scale (  .86). All items used a 7-point response format (1  completely disagree, 7  completely agree) so that a high score indicated a high value of the construct. Various demographic details (e.g., age, gender) of participants were also recorded. Results The results from this study are presented in two sections. In the first section, we present factor analyses of the new collective guilt and shame scales to demonstrate their empirical distinctiveness. In the second section, we present findings from multiple regression analyses that tested our two hypotheses. Collective Guilt and Shame Measures All 18 items comprising the guilt and shame scales were factor analyzed with the principal axis extraction method with oblimin rotation. Inspection of the eigenvalues and the scree slope clearly indicated a two-factor solution (59.4% of variance accounted for). All of the guilt items loaded on the same factor (loadings: .58–.90; cross-loadings on the other factor:  .12). All of the shame items loaded on the second factor (loadings .65–.85; cross-loadings on the other factor:  .13). This analysis thus provided excellent evidence for the distinctiveness of the new guilt and shame scales, and, as noted earlier, both had excellent internal reliabilities ( .90). As usual, these overall guilt and shame scales were moderately intercorrelated, r(186)  .68, p  .001. Regression Analyses Table 4 presents the means and standard deviations of the principal variables used in the multiple regression analyses. To test our mediation hypothesis for the shame–reparation link, we re- gressed reparation attitudes onto guilt and shame in a first step and Table 4 Study 3: Means and Intercorrelations Among Principal Variables Variable M SD Guilt Shame Reputation Appraisal Anger Reparation 4.28 1.48 .57 .56 .57 .38 .49 Guilt 3.15 1.47 .68 .48 .33 .45 Shame 3.46 1.51 .61 .53 .44 Reputation 4.04 1.41 .59 .38 Appraisal 3.86 1.47 .29 Anger 3.93 1.56 Note. For all correlations, p  .001. 86 BROWN, GONZÁLEZ, ZAGEFKA, MANZI, AND ČEHAJIĆ Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . then added our measure of reputation management in a second step (Baron & Kenny, 1986). The variance explained in the first step of this model was respectable (R2  .37), F(2, 183)  54.36, p  .001. In this first step, both guilt and shame were reli- able predictors of reparation attitudes (s  .34 and .32, respec- tively; both ps  .001).3 Adding reputation management in the second step produced a reliable increase in variance explained ( R2  .065), Fchange  21.04, p  .001. The regression coeffi- cient for guilt dropped only slightly in this step (  .30, p  .001), whereas that for shame dropped markedly (  .15) to become nonsignificant ( p  .07). And, as expected, the coefficient for the mediator was also highly reliable (  .32, p  .001). The Sobel test for the predicted mediation of Shame  Reputation management was reliable (z  3.76, p  .001), indicating that mediation had occurred.4 A test for possible mediation of the Guilt  Reparation effect proved nonsignificant (z  1.49, p  .14). Finally, only shame predicted reputation management (  .53, p  .001); the coefficient for guilt was small and unreliable ( .12, p  .12). Next, we checked for various alternative explanations of the above finding. In a further regression analysis, we added appraisal of image threat in a first step before entering guilt and shame. The logic here was to demonstrate that the associations between guilt and shame held even when controlling for threat appraisals. It seemed that they did. Though appraisal of image threat had a reliable association with reparation (  .40, p  .001), the relationships among guilt, shame, and reparation were still highly significant in the second step of the analysis (  .34, p  .001, and   .24, p  .005, respectively). Moreover, adding the reputation mediator in the final step still resulted in a nonsignifi- cant effect for shame (  .14, p  .11), a reduction that a Sobel test indicated was reliable (z  2.85, p  .005). In contrast, the beta for guilt was little affected by the addition of the mediator (  .30, p  .001). In a further analysis, we examined whether our effects for guilt and shame held even when controlling for anger about the plight of the Mapuche (Iyer et al., 2007). Accordingly, we added anger in the first step (  .49, p  .001). However, in the second step, guilt and shame still proved to be reliable predictors of reparation attitude (s  .27 and .26, respectively; both ps  .001). Moreover, the hypothesized mediation of the shame effect was still clearly visible in the third step: The shame effect dwindled to nonsignificance (  .12, p  .16), a reliable mediation effect according to a Sobel test (z  3.47, p  .001); the guilt effect was little changed ( .24, p  .001). Thus, it seems that our effects pertain above and beyond any role played by anger. Finally, we added both appraisal of image threat and anger as controls in the first step of the regression. Both proved to be inde- pendent predictors of reparation attitude (s  .28 and .41, respec- tively; both ps  .001). Nevertheless, the guilt and shame effects were still significant in the third step, even with both controls added (guilt:   .28, p  .001; shame:   .20, p  .03). And the predicted mediation of the shame–reparation link was still observable in the final step, whereas the guilt–reparation link was little affected (guilt:   .25, p  .001; shame:   .11, p  .20). Again, a Sobel test indicated that mediation had occurred (z  2.64, p  .01). Discussion The results from this third study support our hypothesis about one of the possible underlying reasons for the cross-sectional association between shame and reparation attitudes. As we had surmised, that association is mediated by a desire to improve or maintain the ingroup’s reputation. Moreover, the shame– reparation link, and its mediation, held even when controlling for appraisals of threat to the ingroup’s image and anger over the treatment of the Mapuche. Three other features of this study deserve comment. One con- cerns the development of improved measures of guilt and shame. The new measures now had high internal reliabilities; had good face validity in the sense that they now clearly tapped intergroup emotions and not appraisals; and, as we have seen, were both predictive of reparation attitudes. In the absence of an alternative contextualized measure of shame elsewhere, we look forward to other investigators exploring its potential in other fields. The second noteworthy point concerns the consistency of the results from the cross-sectional analyses across all three studies, despite the use of different scales and university instead of school students in this third study. As we have shown, both collective guilt and collective shame are reliably associated with reparation attitudes contemporaneously. Although existing theory conven- tionally does not predict such prosocial effects for shame, there seems little doubt about the empirical robustness of the finding (see also Brown & Čehajić, in press; Harvey & Oswald, 2000). Third, it is interesting that these associations between guilt, shame, and reparation held even when controlling for anger over the plight of the outgroup. This finding contrasts with that of Iyer et al. (2007), who found that neither guilt nor shame were predic- tive of reparation when anger was controlled (but cf. Leach et al., 2006). There would seem to be two possible explanations for this disparity. One lies in the measures of guilt, shame, and anger used in the two studies. Iyer et al. (2007) used a technique developed by Lickel et al. (2005) in which respondents are asked to indicate how much of each of several emotions (e.g., guilty, remorseful, ashamed, disgraced, furious, angry) they feel (in this case, about the situation in Iraq). As the authors acknowledged, this method introduces some ambiguity about whether the emotions are per- sonal or group-based. In contrast, our guilt, shame, and anger items are explicit in their reference to emotions felt about what the ingroup has (or has not) done to the outgroup. In contextualizing the questions in this way, we believe that our scales are more 3 The Guilt  Shame interaction was nonsignificant in these analyses and so is not considered further. Likewise, in Studies 1 and 2, there were no interactions between guilt and shame at a cross-sectional level. 4 It is also worth noting that we obtained very similar results in another study (N  192 Chilean university students). In that study, we used measures of guilt and shame rather similar to those used in Studies 1 and 2—in fact, they correlated at .79 and .73, respectively, with the original measures—and measures of reparation attitude and reputation management identical to those used in Study 3. Regressing reparation on guilt and shame yielded significant effects for both (s  .28 and .39, respectively; both ps  .001). Adding the mediator in a second step affected the guilt relationship little (  .25, p  .001) but reduced the shame effect noticeably (  .30, p  .01), a significant drop according to a Sobel test (z  2.54, p  .02). 87COLLECTIVE GUILT AS A PREDICTOR OF REPARATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . clearly focused on intergroup emotions. A second explanation for the difference between the studies is that Iyer et al. (2007) focused on a contemporary and highly charged political situation (the ongoing war in Iraq), whereas our Chilean indigenous– nonindigenous relationship comprises a mixture of some contem- porary but mainly historical mistreatment of the outgroup. Con- ceivably, with the passage of time, self-conscious emotions like guilt and shame regain some of their potency to predict reparative tendencies independently of anger, whereas with ongoing ingroup transgressions, the latter emotion may have more immediate action potential (Leach et al., 2006). General Discussion In drawing general conclusions from these three studies, we make the following brief remarks: First, we believe that our findings help to substantiate the theoretical distinction between guilt and shame at a collective level. Although several commen- tators have argued that guilt and shame have different underlying psychologies and should have different social consequences (Branscombe et al., 2004; Lickel et al., 2004; Tangney & Fischer, 1995), until now there has been little direct evidence to demon- strate this at an intergroup level. Apart from Lickel et al. (2005), who included friends together with groups proper (e.g., family, ethnicity) as potential sources of vicarious shame and guilt, and Iyer et al.’s (2007) recent study of reactions to the war in Iraq, there has been little research showing that the two collective emotions can be distinguished empirically and can then lead to different outcomes. In the studies reported here, we have shown not only that they can be reliably measured but also that they have different longitudinal effects: Collective guilt leads to a subsequent increase in reparative attitudes toward the outgroup, albeit espe- cially for low-shame people, whereas collective shame appears to have only short-term effects on reparation and no independent longitudinal effects. Parenthetically, we can also note that collec- tive shame has been observed to be positively correlated with reparation attitudes in cross-sectional studies conducted in very different contexts, such as postconflict Bosnia (Brown & Čehajić, in press) and interethnic relations in the United States (Harvey & Oswald, 2000). Second, our findings shed further light on the consequences of collective shame. As we have shown, shame seems to be a re- sponse to both a perception that the ingroup is flawed in some way and to a concern about how others see the ingroup. This latter reputational aspect of shame is what can lead to short-term proso- cial effects as ingroup members seek to present their group in a better light (Schmader & Lickel, 2006). The mediation results from Study 3 are certainly consistent with this analysis. One interesting further implication of this argument could be to exam- ine the consequences of making reparation attempts public as opposed to allowing them to remain anonymous. If collective shame is primarily concerned with the potential damage to the image of the ingroup, then one might expect it to be more sensitive to such anonymity manipulations than would be collective guilt. There is some preliminary evidence to support such a contention (Coen & Brown, 2005). However, in noting that shame can have short-term prosocial effects, we do not wish to imply that it cannot also have the kinds of negative consequences that traditional theorizing predicts. Indeed, we suspect that the fundamentally aversive quality of shame leads people to “take to the path of least resistance” in dealing with it. In questionnaire studies, as here, the easiest course may be one of reputation management, endorsing or claiming to endorse restitution to the outgroup. In other contexts, blaming the victim group or avoiding it may be a less effortful option. A recent experimental study in which collective shame was manipulated independently from collective guilt found evidence of just such negative reactions (Brown & Chatfield, 2006). Third, though we believe that our findings have clarified some fundamental issues in this burgeoning research domain, there obviously remains much to be done. For example, it would be important to investigate the antecedents of collective guilt and shame. At the start of this article, we noted that there are some trends in international politics toward identifying, and then encour- aging acceptance of responsibility for, illegitimate collective ac- tions. However, history is replete with the failure of groups to acknowledge their misdeeds (e.g., Cohen, 2001). So, one question is to identify the conditions that give rise to people’s experience of their ingroup’s culpability and what form that self-conscious emo- tion takes (shame or guilt). In two recent studies in Bosnia, we have found that a key antecedent of collective guilt is some acknowledgement of and acceptance of responsibility for the in- group’s misdeeds, whereas an appraisal of the extent to which the misdeeds threaten the ingroup’s image in the eyes of others seems to stimulate collective shame (Čehajić & Brown, 2006). Last, it is obviously important to extend the longitudinal work we have initiated here to include more than two measuring points and a longer time lag. Such a design would give a more complete picture of the temporal dynamics involved in the relationships between collective guilt, shame, and various outcome variables. We believe that our findings on the beneficial consequences of collective guilt have practical implications. Given that they were obtained from adolescent students, we are encouraged to believe that incorporation of material that highlights the part of dominant groups in perpetrating injustices into educational curricula could play a useful role in raising awareness and changing attitudes. But, to end on a cautionary note, we would not want to argue that stimulating collective guilt can act as a universal panacea for rectifying intergroup inequalities. For one thing, we have evidence from elsewhere in our research program that it can be (adversely) implicated in mediating among outgroup contact, knowledge, and intergroup anxiety (Zagefka, González, Brown, & Manzi, 2005). And it is possible that too frequent and repeated reminders of ingroup misdeeds could eventually transform the socially progres- sive emotion of collective guilt into the more introspective and potentially harmful emotion of collective shame. References Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting interactions. London: Sage. Barkan, E. (2000). The guilt of nations. London: Johns Hopkins University Press. Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173–1182. Baumeister, R. F., Stillwell, A. M., & Heatherton, T. F. (1994). Guilt: An interpersonal approach. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 243–267. 88 BROWN, GONZÁLEZ, ZAGEFKA, MANZI, AND ČEHAJIĆ Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . Bijleveld, C. J. H., & van der Kamp, L. J. T. (1998). Longitudinal data analysis: Designs, models and methods. London: Sage. Branscombe, N. R., & Doosje, B. (2004). Collective guilt: International perspectives. New York: Cambridge University Press. Branscombe, N. R., Slugoski, B., & Kappen, D. M. (2004). The measure- ment of collective guilt: What it is and what it is not. In N. R. Branscombe & B. Doosje (Eds.), Collective guilt: International perspec- tives (pp. 16–34). New York: Cambridge University Press. Brown, R., & Čehajić, S. (in press). Dealing with the past and facing the future: Mediators of the effects of collective guilt and shame in Bosnia. European Journal of Social Psychology. Brown, R., & Chatfield, J. (2006). Shame on us: Social consequences of a group-based dysphoric emotion. Unpublished manuscript. Buruma, I. (1994). The wages of guilt: Memories of war in Germany and Japan. London: Jonathan Cape. Čehajić, S., & Brown, R. (2006). The burden of our times: Antecedents of group-based guilt and shame. Unpublished manuscript. Cialdini, R. B., Borden, R. J., Thorne, A., Walker, M. R., Freeman, S., & Sloan, L. R. (1976). Basking in reflected glory: Three (football) field studies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 366–374. Coen, S., & Brown, R. (2005, August 30). It depends on your point of view: Perspective taking, anonymity and the experience of group-based guilt and shame. Paper presented at the British Psychological Society Social Psychology Section Annual Conference, Edinburgh, Scotland. Cohen, S. (2001). States of denial: Knowing about atrocities and suffering. Oxford, England: Polity Press. Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: Design and analysis issues for field settings. London: Houghton Mifflin. Doosje, B., Branscombe, N. R., Spears, R., & Manstead, A. S. R. (1998). Guilty by association: When one’s group has a negative history. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 872–886. Finkel, S. E. (1995). Causal analysis with panel data. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Harvey, R. D., & Oswald, D. L. (2000). Collective guilt and shame as motivation for White support for Black programs. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 30, 1790–1811. Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2000). Essentialist beliefs about social categories. British Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 113–127. Instituto Nacionalde Estadı́stica. (2002). Estadı́sticas sociales de los pueb- los indı́genas en Chile [Social statistics of the indigenous peoples in Chile]. Santiago, Chile: Gobierno de Chile. Iyer, A., Leach, C. W., & Crosby, F. (2003). White guilt and racial compensation: The benefits and limits of self-focus. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 117–129. Iyer, A., Schmader, T., & Lickel, B. (2007). Why individuals protest the perceived transgressions of their country: The role of anger, shame, and guilt. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 572–587. Leach, C. W., Iyer, A., & Pederson, A. (2006). Anger and guilt about ingroup advantage explain the willingness for political action. Person- ality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1232–1245. Leach, C. W., Snider, N., & Iyer, A. (2002). Poisoning the consciences of the fortunate: The experience of relative advantage and support for social equality. In I. Walker & H. Smith (Eds.), Relative deprivation: Specification, development, and integration (pp. 136–163). New York: Cambridge University Press. Lepore, L., & Brown, R. (1997). Category activation and stereotype accessibility: Is prejudice inevitable? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 275–287. Lewis, H. B. (1971). Shame and guilt in neurosis. New York: International Universities Press. Lickel, B., Schmader, T., & Barquissau, M. (2004). The evocation of moral emotions in intergroup contexts: The distinction between collective guilt and collective shame. In N. R. Branscombe & B. Doosje (Eds.), Col- lective guilt: International perspectives (pp. 35–55). New York: Cam- bridge University Press. Lickel, B., Schmader, T., Curtis, M., Scarnier, M., & Ames, D. R. (2005). Vicarious shame and guilt. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 8, 145–157. McClelland, G. H., & Judd, C. M. (1993). The statistical difficulties of detecting interactions and moderator effects. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 376–390. McGarty, C., Pederson, A., Leach, C. W., Mansell, T., Waller, J., & Bliuc, A.-M. (2005). Group-based guilt as a predictor of commitment to apol- ogy. British Journal of Social Psychology, 44, 659–680. Mead, G. H. (1934). On social psychology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Ministerio de Planificación y Cooperación. (2003). Informe comisión de verdad histórica y nuevo trato de los pueblos indı́genas [Commission of historical truth and new treatment of the indigenous peoples]. Santiago, Chile: Gobierno de Chile. Niedenthal, P. M., Tangney, J. P., & Gavanski, I. (1994). “If only I weren’t” versus “If only I hadn’t”: Distinguishing shame and guilt in counterfactual thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 585–595. Pederson, A., Beven, J., Walker, I., & Griffiths, B. (2004). Attitudes toward indigenous Australians: The role of empathy and guilt. Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 14, 233–249. Pettigrew, T. F., & Meertens, R. W. (1995). Subtle and blatant prejudice in Western Europe. European Journal of Social Psychology, 25, 57–75. Roccas, S., Klar, Y., & Liviatan, I. (2004). Exonerating cognitions, group identification, and personal values as predictors of collective guilt among Jewish-Israelis. In N. R. Branscombe & B. Doosje (Eds.), Col- lective guilt: International perspectives (pp. 130–147). New York: Cam- bridge University Press. Roseman, I. J., West, C., & Schwartz, T. S. (1994). Phenomenology, behaviors, and goals differentiate discrete emotions. Journal of Person- ality and Social Psychology, 67, 206–221. Saiz, J.-L. (2002). Atribución de estereotipos: Los indı́genas Mapuches que perciben los Chilenos [Attribution of stereotypes: the indigenous Mapu- che as perceived by Chileans]. In J. F. Morales, D. Páez, A. L. Kornblit, & D. Asún (Eds.), Psicologı́a social (pp. 145–151). Buenos Aires, Argentina: Pearson Education. Schmader, T., & Lickel, B. (2006). Stigma and shame: Emotional re- sponses to the stereotypic actions of one’s ethnic ingroup. In S. Levin & C. van Laar (Eds.), Stigma and group inequality: Social psychological approaches (pp. 261–286). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Shaver, P., Schwartz, J., Kirson, D., & O’Connor, C. (1987). Emotion knowledge: Further exploration of a prototype approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 1061–1086. Smith, E. R. (1993). Social identity and social emotions: Toward new conceptualizations of prejudice. In D. M. Mackie & D. L. Hamilton (Eds.), Affect, cognition and stereotyping (pp. 297–315). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Smith, R. H., Webster, J. M., Parrott, W. G., & Eyre, H. L. (2002). The role of public exposure in moral and nonmoral shame and guilt. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 138–159. Steele, S. (1990). The content of our character: A new vision of race in America. New York: St. Martin’s Press. Swim, J. K., & Miller, D. L. (1999). White guilt: Its antecedents and consequences for attitudes toward affirmative action. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 500–514. Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In S. Worchel & W. G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of inter- group relations (pp. 7–24). Chicago: Nelson-Hall. Tangney, J. P. (1991). Moral affect: The good, the bad, and the ugly. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 598–607. Tangney, J. P., & Fischer, K. W. (1995). Self-conscious emotions: The 89COLLECTIVE GUILT AS A PREDICTOR OF REPARATION Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly . psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment and pride. New York: Guil- ford Press. Tangney, J. P., Miller, R. S., Flicker, L., & Barlow, D. H. (1996). Are shame, guilt, and embarrassment distinct emotions? Journal of Person- ality and Social Psychology, 70, 1256–1269. Tangney, J. P., Wagner, P., Fletcher, C., & Gramzow, R. (1992). Shamed into anger? The relation of shame and guilt to anger and self-reported aggression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 669–675. Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., & Wetherell, M. S. (1987). Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorization theory. Oxford, MA: Blackwell. Weiner, B. (1995). Judgments of responsibility: A foundation for a theory of social conduct. New York: Guilford Press. Yzerbyt, V. Y., Rocher, S., & Schadron, G. (1997). Stereotypes as expla- nations: A subjective essentialistic view of group perception. In R. Spears, P. J. Oakes, N. Ellemers, & A. Haslam (Eds.), The social psychology of stereotyping and group life (pp. 20–50). Oxford, MA: Blackwell. Zagefka, H., González, R., Brown, R., & Manzi, J. (2005). To know you is to love you? Differential longitudinal effects of intergroup contact and knowledge on intergroup anxiety and prejudice among indigenous and nonindigenous Chileans. Unpublished manuscript. Received September 23, 2005 Revision received May 21, 2007 Accepted May 22, 2007  New Editors Appointed, 2009–2014 The Publications and Communications Board of the American Psychological Association an- nounces the appointment of six new editors for 6-year terms beginning in 2009. As of January 1, 2008, manuscripts should be directed as follows: ● Journal of Applied Psychology (http://www.apa.org/journals/apl), Steve W. J. Kozlowski, PhD, Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824. ● Journal of Educational Psychology (http://www.apa.org/journals/edu), Arthur C. Graesser, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Memphis, 202 Psychology Building, Memphis, TN 38152. ● Journal of Personality and Social Psychology: Interpersonal Relations and Group Processes (http://www.apa.org/journals/psp), Jeffry A. Simpson, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota, 75 East River Road, N394 Elliott Hall, Minneapolis, MN 55455. ● Psychology of Addictive Behaviors (http://www.apa.org/journals/adb), Stephen A. Maisto, PhD, Department of Psychology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244. ● Behavioral Neuroscience (http://www.apa.org/journals/bne), Mark S. Blumberg, PhD, De- partment of Psychology, University of Iowa, E11 Seashore Hall, Iowa City, IA 52242. ● Psychological Bulletin (http://www.apa.org/journals/bul), Stephen P. Hinshaw, PhD, Depart- ment of Psychology, University of California, Tolman Hall #1650, Berkeley, CA 94720. (Manuscripts will not be directed to Dr. Hinshaw until July 1, 2008, as Harris Cooper will continue as editor until June 30, 2008.) Electronic manuscript submission: As of January 1, 2008, manuscripts should be submitted electronically via the journal’s Manuscript Submission Portal (see the website listed above with each journal title). Manuscript submission patterns make the precise date of completion of the 2008 volumes uncertain. Current editors, Sheldon Zedeck, PhD, Karen R. Harris, EdD, John F. Dovidio, PhD, Howard J. Shaffer, PhD, and John F. Disterhoft, PhD, will receive and consider manuscripts through December 31, 2007. Harris Cooper, PhD, will continue to receive manuscripts until June 30, 2008. Should 2008 volumes be completed before that date, manuscripts will be redirected to the new editors for consideration in 2009 volumes. 90 BROWN, GONZÁLEZ, ZAGEFKA, MANZI, AND ČEHAJIĆ Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs . Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .