fournier2008.pdf
aE38wPgNprea1GOVGAcr0UcK16Oy-fournier2008.pdf.plain.html

Integrating Dispositions, Signatures, and the Interpersonal Domain Marc A. Fournier University of Toronto Scarborough D. S. Moskowitz and David C. Zuroff McGill University A person’s behavior across situations can be characterized in terms of a mean level (disposition), a dispersion within the person around that mean level, and a stable organization to the pattern of dispersion (signature). The authors’ goals were to examine the structure and stability of behavior, both at the level of behavioral dispositions and at the level of behavioral signatures. Participants completed event- contingent records of their social interactions over a 20-day period. Participants recorded their own social behavior (dominant, agreeable, submissive, quarrelsome) in 4 situations defined by the perceived social behavior of their primary interaction partners (agreeable–dominant, agreeable–submissive, quarrelsome– submissive, quarrelsome–dominant). Findings suggest that (a) once the normative influences of situa- tions on behavior are removed, the remaining behavioral variation reflects both consistent cross- situational differences between individuals (dispositions) and consistent situational differences within individuals (signatures); (b) both dispositions and signatures display a 2-dimensional structure in adherence to the interpersonal circle; and (c) both dispositions and signatures constitute stable aspects of personality functioning. Keywords: models, personality traits, personality signatures, social behavior, interpersonal interaction Two prominent theoretical approaches to the study of the indi- vidual are often perceived as competing and potentially irrecon- cilable. On one side, researchers have argued that individual dif- ferences in behavior comprise a small set of pervasive cross- situational consistencies. On the other side, researchers have argued that such behavioral consistencies conceal meaningful cross-situational patterns of variability. Historically, the field has sustained long periods during which each approach progressed in relative isolation, punctuated sporadically by volatile periods of debate, which led Mischel and Shoda (1998) to argue that re- searchers must decide either “to carve an overarching framework that integrates the two disciplines to pursue both goals within one field, or to show that such an integration is impossible” (p. 232). The present research represents preliminary steps toward demon- strating that an integration of these two approaches is possible. We propose that each person’s behavior across situations can be con- ceptualized in terms of a stable mean level (disposition) and a stable organization around that mean level (signature). Dispositions Versus Signatures Allport (1937) said that the trait construct would be the corner- stone to a comprehensive theory of personality, and the decades since have attested to the importance of traits. There is now little debate as to whether or not traits exist, and an emerging body of evidence attests to the impact that traits have on the life course. Recent reviews of the literature, both narrative (Ozer & Benet- Martı́nez, 2006) and meta-analytic (Roberts, Kuncel, Shiner, Caspi, & Goldberg, 2007), have attested to the practical utility of personality traits for predicting a wide range of socially valued life outcomes, such as marital success, occupational attainment, per- sonal health, and longevity. In their meta-analysis, Roberts et al. (2007) obtained effect sizes for personality traits that were com- parable to the effects of socioeconomic status and cognitive ability, variables widely accepted as being important contributors to a long and fulfilling life. Personality traits, however, have not always been held in such high regard. Traits presume substantial consistency in the behavior of individuals, an assumption that was severely criticized by Mis- chel (1968), who observed that cross-situational consistency coef- ficients rarely surpass a ceiling of .30. In reply to Mischel, re- searchers argued that single indices of behavior invariably contain a sizable component of error variance. If error is randomly dis- tributed across occasions, situations, or behavioral referents, then the process of aggregating or smoothing across assessments should provide a closer approximation of the true score, which in turn should reveal greater consistency in the behavior of individuals. Epstein (1979, 1980) and Moskowitz (1982, 1988) demonstrated that consistency coefficients surpass the postulated .30 ceiling when assessments of behavior are aggregated across occasions or situations. Marc A. Fournier, Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Scarborough, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; D. S. Moskowitz and David C. Zuroff, Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada. Portions of these findings were presented at the 7th Annual Meeting of the Society for Interpersonal Theory and Research, Toronto, Ontario, in 2004, and in the J. S. Tanaka Personality Dissertation Award address delivered by Marc A. Fournier at the 6th Annual Meeting of the Associ- ation for Research in Personality, New Orleans, Louisiana, in 2005. This research was supported by grants from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and Fonds pour la Formation de Chercheurs et l’Aide à la Recherche du Québec. We extend our appreciation to Ella Vanderbilt, Jennifer Russell, and Elizabeth Foley for their assistance with the data collection. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Marc A. Fournier, Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Scarborough, 1265 Military Trail, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M1C 1A4. E-mail: fournier@utsc.utoronto.ca Journal of Personality and Social Psychology Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 2008, Vol. 94, No. 3, 531–545 0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.3.531 531 However, perhaps scores do not need to be aggregated to a single point to capture consistencies in the behavior of individuals. There could be local consistencies in the behavior of individuals that would be smoothed over by aggregating to the mean score. To the extent that an individual’s behavior varies systematically and meaningfully across situations, the process of aggregation throws away true variance with error variance. Intraindividual variability in behavior is itself a stable individual difference characteristic (Baird, Le, & Lucas, 2006; Eid & Diener, 1999; Fleeson, 2001; Moskowitz & Zuroff, 2004), and there is some evidence to suggest there is stability in the organization and patterning of this variabil- ity (Shoda, Mischel, & Wright, 1994). An integrative approach to behavior is thus needed to capture both the differences between individuals in terms of cross-situational consistencies as well as the differences within individuals in terms of cross-situational patterns of variability. The groundwork for such an approach can be found in the work of Wright and Mischel (1987), who proposed reconceptualizing behavioral dispositions as stable clusters of if. . . then. . . proposi- tions. Mischel and Shoda (1995, 1998, 1999) subsequently elabo- rated upon the conditional approach as part of their cognitive– affective processing system (CAPS) model of personality. They proposed that personality comprises a complex configuration of conscious and unconscious mediating units (i.e., goals, beliefs, expectancies, and competencies), the content, accessibility, and organization of which are unique to each individual. Individuals encode the psychological features of situations, which activate a characteristic subset of cognitions and affects; in turn, these cognitive–affective units activate plans and strategies, which man- ifest as surface behavior. Across situations, each individual thus demonstrates a stable and unique profile of behavior of character- istic size and shape. The CAPS approach therefore conceives of two sorts of stable individual differences: first, individual differ- ences in the chronic accessibility or availability of cognitive– affective units and, second, individual differences in the organiza- tion of relations among cognitive–affective units. Together, these two sorts of stable individual differences account for the intrain- dividual organization of behavior into stable situation–behavior contingencies. Shoda et al. (1994) examined the stability of situation–behavior profiles through a large-scale field research program conducted at a residential summer camp for children characterized by signifi- cant adjustment problems. Hourly observations of the children were collected over a 6-week period by the camp counselors, who recorded the class of situation that each child encountered (e.g., peer approach, peer tease) and whether or not the child responded with any of the behavioral categories of interest (e.g., compliance, prosocial talk). To test the stability of the children’s situation– behavior profiles, Shoda et al. randomly divided the data for each child from each situation in half, thereby yielding two situation– behavior profiles for each child from nonoverlapping samples of occasions. Stability of the situation–behavior profiles was indexed by the within-subject correlation coefficient, which estimated the degree of resemblance between the two profiles for each child. Mean levels of profile stability ranged from .28 to .47, leading Shoda et al. to conclude that the behavior of a substantial number of the children from the summer camp could be characterized by idiographic signatures, stable intraindividual patterns of variability across salient psychological situations. Steps Toward Integration The question of whether the trait and social–cognitive ap- proaches can be successfully integrated has produced considerable controversy in recent years. Some say that social–cognitive mech- anisms constitute lower order processes from which traits arise (Roberts & Wood, 2006), whereas others say that social–cognitive mechanisms arise from traits, which constitute the core human nature (McCrae & Costa, 1996). Fleeson (2001) has proposed broadening the definition of traits to incorporate the entire density distribution of states, so that all parameters of the density distri- bution—location (mean), size (standard deviation), and shape (skew, kurtosis)—can be viewed as trait constructs. Traits would then refer not only to enduring mean level differences in behavior between individuals but also to the extent of stable variability in behavior. Conversely, in some of his more recent writings, Mischel (2004) has broadened his definition of the behavioral signature so that it incorporates both the shape and elevation of the situation– behavior profile. Signatures would then contain information per- taining to both pattern and mean level. Given that broadly defined constructs run the risk of rendering scientific communication less precise, we choose to define dispo- sitions and signatures as separate yet complementary components to the organization of behavior across situations. Although behav- ioral signatures are dispositional in the sense that we expect them to be stable features of the individual, we use the terms disposition and signature here to refer, respectively, to mean level of behavior and to the patterning of behavior around that mean level. In so doing, we hope to preserve conceptual clarity and to show that one integrative framework is capable of accounting for both cross- situational consistencies and cross-situational patterns of variabil- ity. Our definitions of the terms disposition and signature align each of these concepts with distinct features of the situation–behavior profile. Cronbach and Gleser (1953) decomposed profiles into three basic elements: elevation, the average or central tendency of an individual’s behavior across situations; scatter, the spread or standard deviation of an individual’s behavior across situations; and shape, the organization or patterning of an individual’s be- havior across situations. Elevation corresponds to our definition of a disposition, whereas shape corresponds to our definition of a signature. The larger the between-subject variation in behavior, the more we need elevation (i.e., dispositions) in order to account for the behavior of individuals. In contrast, the larger the within- subject variation in behavior, the more we need shape (i.e., signa- tures) in order to account for the behavior of individuals. The situation–behavior profile thus provides an elegant framework in which to integrate different points of view on consistency and variability, as both dispositions and signatures constitute critical elements of the situation–behavior profile. Alongside an impressive body of research attesting to the lon- gitudinal stability of dispositions (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1997), an emerging body of research now shows that intraindividual vari- ability—that is, scatter—is also a stable and meaningful individual difference. Borkenau and Ostendorf (1998) tested the isomorphism of within-person and between-person structures in day-to-day be- havior and found that the Big Five could be used to describe not only the factor structure of individual differences in traits but also the intraindividual factor structure of daily states assessed over a 532 FOURNIER, MOSKOWITZ, AND ZUROFF 3-month interval. Fleeson (2001) assessed Big Five-relevant states and behavior over intervals of several weeks and found that all of the parameters with which one describes a density distribution of states—location (mean), size (standard deviation), and shape (skew, kurtosis)—showed stable individual differences. Mosko- witz and Zuroff (2004) collected event-contingent records of social interactions over a 3-week interval and found that indices of intraindividual variability along the agentic and communal dimen- sions of behavior also constituted stable forms of individual dif- ference. Although these studies attest to the stability of intraindi- vidual variability in behavior, there is a scarcity of data to suggest comparable stability in the organization and patterning of this variability across salient psychological situations. In spite of a resurgence of interest in the situation-based contingencies under- lying the expression of trait-relevant behavior (Fleeson, 2007; Saucier, Bel-Bahar, & Fernandez, 2007), only Shoda et al. (1994) have looked at the stability of situation–behavior relations, and they did so only by observing the behavior of psychiatrically disturbed children attending summer camp. It remains to be seen whether behavioral signatures are also stable features of normal adult individuals. The Interpersonal Domain Although the CAPS approach provides the template for a con- ceptual framework that would be capable of accounting for both consistency and variability in behavior across situations, the model does not specify the units of behavior and situations in which to search for personality coherence. These lacunae leave several theoretical questions unanswered, including how to conceptualize the situational antecedents (the ifs, or the x-axis of the situation– behavior profile), the behavioral consequences (the thens, or the y-axis of the situation–behavior profile), and the intermediary cognitive–affective units. To address these questions, one must integrate the CAPS approach with some theory of content that specifies meaningful, broadly applicable units of behavior and situations. The interpersonal domain has long been thought to be a signif- icant component of adaptive personality functioning (Bakan, 1966; Sullivan, 1953), and the interpersonal circle provides content and organization with which to conceptualize the domain of day-to-day social interaction. Interpersonal researchers depict the structure of interpersonal behavior in terms of a circular arrangement of vari- ables organized around two orthogonal and intersecting dimen- sions (Freedman, Leary, Ossario, & Coffey, 1951; LaForge, Leary, Naboisek, Coffey, & Freedman, 1954; Leary, 1957; Wiggins, 1980, 1982). The vertical (or agentic) dimension involves con- cerns relating to autonomy and control and spans from submis- siveness to dominance. The horizontal (or communal) dimension involves concerns relating to affiliation and connection and spans from quarrelsomeness to agreeableness. Sampling characteristics along the axes of the interpersonal circle provides behavioral constructs of similar conceptual breadth (Moskowitz, 1994). The interpersonal circle can serve as a framework not only for conceptualizing the domain of interpersonal behavior but also for conceptualizing the domain of interpersonal situations. From the vantage point of the interpersonal theorist, the most salient psy- chological features of the situation are found in the behavior of the individual with whom one is interacting. Interpersonalists empha- size the tendency for the behavior of one individual to elicit, evoke, or invite from another individual a complementary class of behavior in return (Kiesler, 1983; Leary, 1957), defined by reci- procity along the agentic dimension of behavior (dominance be- gets submission) and by correspondence along the communal dimension of behavior (hostility begets hostility). However, given that the principles of complementarity are probabilistic, individu- als can still display idiographic patterns of behavior across situa- tions that, to a greater or lesser extent, depart from the nomothetic rules of complementarity. Bringing an interpersonal approach to the CAPS framework yields a representation of personality as a complex system of interrelated structures and processes, calibrated to enable the in- dividual to make meaning of, and respond adaptively to, changing interpersonal situations. Salient psychological features of the in- terpersonal situation are encoded and assigned meaning in terms of the individual’s interpersonal goals, beliefs, expectancies, and competencies. As each individual is in some respects like all others and is in other respects unique, individuals assign both common (or shared) and idiosyncratic (or nonshared) meanings to interper- sonal situations; consequently, each individual’s response to the situation should in certain ways be similar to, and should in other ways be different from, the responses of others to that same situation. Although idiographic departures from the interpersonal circle are thus expected, behavioral responses should show nomo- thetic structure and organization, both within and between indi- viduals, consistent with the two dimensions of the interpersonal circle. This framework leads us to have certain expectations concern- ing the structure and stability of behavior in day-to-day social interaction. First, to the extent that individuals assign common meanings to the same interpersonal situation, all individuals should to some extent conform to the rules of complementarity, repre- senting the nomothetic organization of situation–behavior contin- gencies. Second, to the extent that individuals assign idiosyncratic meanings to the same interpersonal situation, all individuals should to some extent depart from the rules of complementarity, repre- senting the idiographic organization of situation–behavior contin- gencies; removing the normative influences of situations should therefore reveal the unique disposition and signature of each individual, both of which constitute sources of individual differ- ences. Third, to the extent that the interpersonal circle accurately represents the organization of interpersonal behavior, the behavior of individuals should demonstrate a two-dimensional structure, both across individuals and intraindividually. Fourth, to the extent that all behavior arises from a stable system of interrelated struc- tures and processes, we should find stability in behavior both in the form of stable cross-situational consistencies (or dispositions) and in the form of stable cross-situational patterns of variability (or signatures). In the following section, we lay out the analyses through which we examine these ideas in greater depth. The Present Study Participants recruited from the community completed event- contingent records of their social interactions over a 20-day period. Units of behavior and situations were sampled from the interper- sonal circle through participants’ own self-reports. Participants provided information pertaining to the behavior that they had 533DISPOSITIONS AND SIGNATURES performed during the social interaction. Four behavioral charac- teristics (dominance, agreeableness, submissiveness, quarrelsome- ness) of similar conceptual breadth were sampled from the inter- personal circle. Given that from an interpersonal perspective it is the behavior of the interaction partner that defines the immediate psychological situation for the participant, the interpersonal circle was also used to conceptualize the behavior of the interaction partner. Participants provided their perceptions of the agentic and communal behavior of their interaction partners, which allowed us to classify the situation in terms of whether the primary interaction partner was perceived as having been agreeable– dominant, agreeable–submissive, quarrelsome–submissive, or quarrelsome– dominant. The four situational categories were therefore of equal conceptual breadth, and the number of situations was comparable to the number utilized by Shoda et al. (1994). Raw situation–behavior profiles were constructed for each par- ticipant by averaging the data available from each participant in each of the four situations. These raw profiles included (a) person effects (i.e., trait influences), (b) situation effects (i.e., nomothetic situational influences), and (c) Person  Situation interaction effects (i.e., idiographic situational influences). We examined the nomothetic effects of situations to determine whether situations would elicit levels of behavior consistent with the rules of comple- mentarity (Kiesler, 1983; Leary, 1957). Following the principle of reciprocity, we predicted that situational variation in the agentic behavior of interaction partners would influence participants’ dominance and submissiveness; we expected that individuals would report higher levels of submissiveness when they saw the other as dominant and higher levels of dominance when they saw the other as submissive. Following the principle of correspon- dence, we predicted that situational variation in the communal behavior of interaction partners would influence participants’ agreeableness and quarrelsomeness; we expected that individuals would report higher levels of quarrelsomeness when they saw the other as quarrelsome and higher levels of agreeableness when they saw the other as agreeable. Following the procedures outlined by Shoda et al. (1994), the raw situation–behavior profiles were rescaled to remove the no- mothetic influences of situations. Each standardized situation– behavior profile could then be characterized in terms of three components: elevation, the average or central tendency of an individual’s behavior across situations; scatter, the spread or stan- dard deviation of an individual’s behavior across situations; and shape, the organization or patterning of an individual’s behavior across situations. We subjected the standardized profiles to a series of mixed linear models to partition the within-subject and between-subject sources of variance. These models allowed us to calculate the intraclass correlation for each scale of behavior, which quantified the extent of consistency and variability in be- havior across situations. Establishing that there is consistency in behavior across situations sets the stage for examining the struc- ture and stability of dispositions. Establishing that there is also variability in behavior across situations around each individual’s disposition or central tendency sets the stage for examining the structure and stability of signatures. The interpersonal circle provides clear expectations concerning how the scales of behavior should intercorrelate: First, scales on opposing sides of the circle (e.g., dominance and submissiveness) should be significantly and inversely correlated; second, scales at right angles on the circle (e.g., dominance and agreeableness) should be essentially uncorrelated. We examined whether the two-dimensional structure of the interpersonal circle could be found both across individuals and intraindividually. Although a two-dimensional structure has already been demonstrated in the interpersonal behavior of individuals at the level of individual differences (Moskowitz, 1994), it has yet to be demonstrated that the same structure underlies the intraindividual organization of interpersonal behavior. To address this problem, we calculated the between-subject and within-subject correlation coefficients for all pairings of behavioral scales. The between-subject and within- subject correlations indicated the extent to which dispositions and signatures, respectively, conform to the expected structure. Finally, we examined the stability of dispositions and signa- tures. We randomly divided the data from each participant in half, which produced two profiles for each participant. Each profile could then be characterized in terms of its elevation (disposition) and shape (signature). The stability of behavioral dispositions was indexed by between-subject correlation coefficients, which indi- cated the degree of similarity between the elevations of the two profile halves. The stability of behavioral signatures was indexed by within-subject correlation coefficients, which indicated the degree of similarity between the shapes of the two profile halves. As each stability estimate obtained was to some extent dependent on how the data had been randomized, we repeated the random- ization procedure 1,000 times. Stability coefficients were aggre- gated and meta-analyzed to determine the mean level of stability for each scale of behavior. Theorizing that both dispositions and signatures constitute stable aspects of personality functioning, we predicted that mean levels of stability for both dispositions and signatures would be significantly greater than zero for each scale of behavior. Such findings would suggest that the behavior of at least a substantial number of individuals could be characterized both by a stable mean level across situations and by a stable organization around that mean level. Method Participants Participants were recruited from the community. Newspaper advertisements recruited individuals holding paid employment (at least 30 hr per week) to take part in a study of social interaction. Following a telephone orientation and an introductory session, 130 individuals agreed to participate in the study. Nine individuals did not complete the procedure, and of the remaining 121 individuals, 113 (87% of the original sample of 130 individuals) provided usable data. The most common reason for declaring participants’ data unusable was failure to receive their record forms by mail in a timely (i.e., daily) fashion. The sample was evenly divided between men (56) and women (57) and ranged in age from 22 to 70 years (M  40.88, SD  11.35). There were 88 participants (78%) whose first language was English, 24 participants (21%) whose first language was other than English, and 1 participant (1%) for whom this information was not available. With respect to highest level of education completed, 1 individual (1%) had not completed high school, 13 individuals (12%) had completed high school or trade school, 35 individuals (31%) had completed at least one year of college, 43 individuals 534 FOURNIER, MOSKOWITZ, AND ZUROFF (38%) had a bachelor’s degree, and 19 individuals (17%) had a postgraduate degree; information about education was missing for 2 individuals. Participants held a variety of occupations (e.g., data analyst, engineer, secretary, and teacher). Results from this sample concerning the validity of the interpersonal grid (Moskowitz & Zuroff, 2005, Study 3) have previously been reported. Event-Contingent Recording Procedure Participants first attended a meeting during which the proce- dures for the study were explained and a questionnaire battery was administered. Participants then completed a one-page record form following each social interaction of at least 5-min duration every day for 20 days. Forms requested information pertaining to the behaviors participants had performed, the intensity of several situational appraisals, and their role relationship to their primary interaction partner. Participants were told to use as many or as few forms as their natural day-to-day social activity dictated and com- pleted an average of 132 forms over the 20-day period (i.e., 6 to 7 forms per day). Participants mailed their forms to the researchers on the first weekday following each day of record keeping. After the 20-day period, participants were given $150 remuneration. Behavior. Forty-six statements were used to sample four be- havioral characteristics (dominance, agreeableness, submissive- ness, quarrelsomeness) of similar conceptual breadth from the interpersonal domain. Moskowitz (1994) provided evidence for the reliability of the behavioral statements and for the convergent and discriminant validity of the event-contingent recording procedure for the measurement of interpersonal behavior, showing that the pattern of correlations between behavioral scales corresponded to predictions based on the interpersonal circle. Subsequent research with the behavioral scales provided additional support for their validity. Aggregated scores on the behavioral scales correlate with traditional one-occasion interpersonal trait questionnaires (Mos- kowitz, 1994), whereas situation-specific scores on the behavioral scales show sensitivity to variations in social status (Moskowitz, Suh, & Desaulniers, 1994) and to the gender composition of friendships (Suh, Moskowitz, Fournier, & Zuroff, 2004). The four behavioral scales each consisted of 12 items. Domi- nance was sampled through such items as “I expressed an opinion” and “I made a suggestion.” Submissiveness was sampled through such items as “I did not state my own views” and “I gave in.” Agreeableness was sampled through such items as “I expressed affection with words or gestures” and “I expressed reassurance.” Quarrelsomeness was sampled through such items as “I confronted the other about something I did not like” and “I made a sarcastic comment.” One item was used for both the dominance and quar- relsomeness scales (i.e., “I criticized the other”), and another item was used for both the submissiveness and agreeableness scales (i.e., “I went along with the other”); as a result, the total number of items in the inventory equaled 46 instead of 48. For a complete presentation of this item inventory, see Moskowitz (1994). On each form, participants were asked to endorse the behavioral items they had performed during the interaction episode. As par- ticipants quickly adopt response sets when the same items are repeatedly presented, four different versions of the form were used, each of which presented a different subset of items. Partic- ipants completed Form 1 on Day 1, Form 2 on Day 2, Form 3 on Day 3, and Form 4 on Day 4, returning to Form 1 following each 4-day cycle. Items from each of the four behavioral scales were distributed equally across the four forms. Three items for each behavioral scale were thus presented on each form, with each form presenting a different 3 items out of the sample of 12 items for each behavioral scale. Event-specific scores for the behavioral scales were subse- quently constructed for each interaction episode. Behavioral items that were endorsed by participants received a score of 1; items that were not endorsed received a score of 0. Event-specific raw scores were constructed by calculating the mean number of items en- dorsed for each behavioral scale. Raw scores could range from 0 to 1 and indicated the uncorrected frequency with which a behav- ior was endorsed during that interaction episode. Event-specific ipsatized scores were constructed by subtracting the mean score for all scales within an event from each raw score for that event. Ipsatized scores could range from .75 to .751 and indicated the frequency with which a behavior was endorsed, correcting for the individual’s general rate of item endorsement during that interac- tion episode (cf. Horowitz, Rosenberg, Baer, Ureno, & Vallasenor, 1988). Corrected frequencies could assume either positive or neg- ative values: Positive values indicated that event-specific rates for a given kind of behavior were higher than the participant’s general rate of behaving during that interaction episode; negative values indicated that event-specific rates for a given kind of behavior were lower than the participant’s general rate of behaving during that interaction episode. Because the process of ipsatizing pro- duces very small numbers, all scores were multiplied by 100. Situations. On the reverse side of each record form, partici- pants were asked to complete the interpersonal grid (Moskowitz & Zuroff, 2005), a single-item instrument developed to assess per- ceptions of others’ interpersonal behavior. The grid consists of an 11  11 arrangement of squares depicting the agentic and com- munal dimensions of interpersonal behavior. The vertical (or agen- tic) axis of the grid is anchored by “assured–dominant” on the top and by “unassured–submissive” on the bottom. The horizontal (or communal) axis of the grid is anchored by “cold–quarrelsome” on the left and by “warm–agreeable” on the right. The corners are anchored by “engaging” (top right), “deferring” (bottom right), “withdrawn” (bottom left), and “critical” (top left). Participants rated their perceptions of their primary interaction partners by placing a single x in any square on the grid, thereby indicating the extent to which they perceived the other person as dominant (vs. submissive) and as agreeable (vs. quarrelsome). For each social interaction, scores for partner agency (i.e., the position of the x from the bottom) and partner communion (i.e., the position of the x from the left) were calculated. Scores could range between 1 and 11, with higher scores indicating greater perceived levels of partner agency and partner communion. Scores for part- ner agency and partner communion were then used to construct a 1 The maximum value of an event-specific ipsatized score (.75) is obtained by endorsing all of the items from one behavioral scale (yielding a raw score of 1) and none of the items from the other behavioral scales (yielding raw scores of 0): 1  (1  0  0  0)/4  1  .25  .75. The minimum value of an event-specific ipsatized score (.75) is obtained by endorsing none of the items from one behavioral scale (yielding a raw score of 0) and all of the items from the other behavioral scales (yielding raw scores of 1): 0  (0  1  1  1)/4  0  .75  –.75. 535DISPOSITIONS AND SIGNATURES fourfold taxonomy of interpersonal situations, of similar concep- tual breadth, defined by the four quadrants of the interpersonal grid. Each axis of the grid was split in half. If partner agency exceeded a score of 6, then the situation was categorized as dominant; otherwise, it was categorized as submissive. If partner communion exceeded a score of 6, then the situation was catego- rized as agreeable; otherwise, it was categorized as quarrelsome. Interaction episodes were therefore categorized in terms of partic- ipants’ perceptions of their primary interaction partners as having been agreeable–dominant, agreeable–submissive, quarrelsome– submissive, or quarrelsome–dominant. Data Requirements Participants thus provided four indices of their behavior in any of four possible interpersonal situations. To ensure an adequate level of resolution in estimating participants’ behavior in each situation, we required participants to provide at least seven inter- action records in each of the four interpersonal situations; a similar criterion was adopted by Shoda et al. (1994) in their study of the Camp Wediko children. Fifty participants (25 men, 25 women) satisfied this criterion; these 50 participants did not differ signif- icantly from excluded participants on any of the five-factor model (NEO Five-Factor Inventory; Costa & McCrae, 1992) or interper- sonal circumplex model (Revised Interpersonal Adjective Scales; Wiggins, 1995) traits, which were assessed in the introductory session. Results We first describe the frequency with which individuals reported interaction episodes in each of the four situations. The primary findings are then presented in four sections. In the first section, we examine the normative influences of situations on behavior and ask whether these influences conform to the principles of comple- mentarity (i.e., reciprocity and correspondence). In the second section, we remove the normative situational influences from the profiles and ask whether there is as much variation remaining within-subjects as there is between-subjects. In the third section, we examine the structure of dispositions and signatures and ask whether the correlations between behavioral scales conform to the structure of the interpersonal circle. In the fourth and final section, we examine the stability of behavior and ask whether dispositions and signatures both constitute stable aspects of personality func- tioning. All analyses were conducted in SAS, Version 8.1 (SAS Institute, 1999). The Frequency of Interaction Episodes The four situations were not encountered with equal frequency. The frequency with which individuals reported events in each type of situation were agreeable–dominant situations, M  59.98, SD  30.76, range  8–124; agreeable–submissive situations, M  39.88, SD  26.20, range  7–103; quarrelsome–submissive situations, M  18.46, SD  12.70, range  7–76; quarrelsome– dominant situations, M  20.82, SD  12.33, range  7–72. We examined the effects of situation on the frequency of social inter- action with a random-intercept mixed linear model using the SAS MIXED procedure. Frequency scores (Level 1) were nested within individuals (Level 2), four scores per individual. Effects for situ- ation were tested sequentially: First, the main effects for agentic situations (i.e., the contrast of partner dominant vs. partner sub- missive) and communal situations (i.e., the contrast of partner agreeable vs. partner quarrelsome) were tested; then, the two-way interaction effect was tested. Both main effects and their two-way interaction effect were significant. Over and above the fact that individuals more often saw their partners as dominant than as submissive, F(1, 49)  12.70, p  .001, and more often saw their partners as agreeable than as quarrelsome, F(1, 49)  92.39, p  .001, individuals most often saw their interaction partners as both dominant and agreeable, F(1, 49)  8.25, p  .01. The Nomothetic Organization of Situation–Behavior Contingencies We began by constructing raw situation–behavior profiles for each individual by averaging the data available from each individ- ual in each of the four situations. Then, we examined the effects of situation on the raw situation–behavior profiles through a series of random-intercept mixed linear models using the SAS MIXED procedure. Situation– behavior contingencies (Level 1) were nested within individuals (Level 2), four scores per individual. Preliminary models considered the potential effects for gender; no gender effects were found, and so gender was removed from all models. Effects for situation were tested sequentially: First, the main effects for agentic situations (the contrast of partner domi- nant vs. partner submissive) and communal situations (the contrast of partner agreeable vs. partner quarrelsome) were tested; then, the two-way interaction effect was tested. Results can be seen in Table 1 and Figure 1. Complementarity was evident. Following the rule of reciprocity, we predicted that agentic situations would influence levels of dominance and submissiveness. As expected, individuals reported higher levels of submissiveness when they saw the other as dom- inant and higher levels of dominance when they saw the other as submissive. Following the rule of correspondence, we predicted that communal situations would influence levels of agreeableness and quarrelsomeness. As expected, individuals reported higher levels of quarrelsomeness when they saw the other as cold and quarrelsome and higher levels of agreeableness when they saw the other as warm and agreeable. Significant interaction effects be- tween agentic and communal situations were also found in the Table 1 Nomothetic Influences of Situations on Behavior Behavior F(1, 49) Agentic situations Communal situations Agentic  Communal Situations Dominance 12.56*** 2.00 0.50 Agreeableness 0.61 187.93*** 7.10* Submissiveness 6.25* 2.18 4.50* Quarrelsomeness 0.00 98.46*** 1.04 Note. N  50. Agentic situations  dominant versus submissive percep- tions of the other; communal situations  agreeable versus quarrelsome perceptions of the other. * p  .05. *** p  .001. 536 FOURNIER, MOSKOWITZ, AND ZUROFF prediction of submissiveness and agreeableness. The expected influence of agentic situations on levels of submissiveness was greater when the other was seen as quarrelsome than when the other was seen as agreeable, t(49)  2.12, p  .05. The expected influence of communal situations on levels of agreeableness was greater when the other was seen as dominant than when the other was seen as submissive, t(49)  2.66, p  .05. The Idiographic Organization of Situation–Behavior Contingencies Following Shoda et al. (1994), we rescaled the raw profiles within situations as z scores (M  0, SD  1) to identify each participant’s distinct profile of behavioral variability across the four interpersonal situations. The process of standardizing within situations in effect served to remove the nomothetic influences of situations on behavior, thus allowing each profile to reflect the participant’s idiographic pattern of situation–behavior contingen- cies in units of standard deviation from the typical level of behav- ior observed in each situation. Individual differences in mean levels of behavior—that is, dispositional behavioral differences between individuals—were unaltered by the process of standard- izing within situations. Standardized scores could assume either positive or negative values: Positive values indicated situation- specific rates of behavior that were above the sample mean; negative values indicated situation-specific rates of behavior that were below the sample mean. We then asked which explains more variability in behavior: the differences observed between individ- uals as a function of their cross-situational consistency or the differences observed within individuals as a function of their cross-situational variability. Should the profiles of individuals show extensive cross-situational consistency in behavior, then we can efficiently conceptualize individual differences in terms of behavioral mean levels. Should the profiles of individuals addi- tionally show extensive cross-situational variability in behavior, then we must incorporate the patterning of this behavioral vari- ability in our conceptualization of individual differences. Within a multilevel framework, the within-subject and between- subject sources of variance can be simultaneously estimated by using the SAS MIXED procedure to fit a series of unconditional means models (mixed linear models with random intercepts and no predictors) in which situation–behavior contingencies (Level 1) are seen as nested within individuals (Level 2). These variance 5 10 15 AD AS QS QD Situation D om in an ce -30 -15 0 AD AS QS QD Situation Q ua rr el so m en es s -10 -5 0 AD AS QS QD Situation Su bm is si ve ns s 0 15 30 AD AS QS QD Situation A gr ee ab le ne ss Figure 1. The nomothetic influences of situations on behavior. AD  agreeable–dominant; AS  agreeable– submissive; QS  quarrelsome–submissive; QD  quarrelsome–dominant. 537DISPOSITIONS AND SIGNATURES estimates can then be combined to form the intraclass correlation (ICC), defined as the between-subject variance divided by the total (within-subject plus between-subject) variance. ICCs can range between zero and one. If there is little or no within-subject vari- ance (i.e., if there is little or no variance due to scatter), then the ICC will approximate one; essentially all of the profile variance would be attributable to individual differences in mean levels. If there is little or no between-subject variance (i.e., if there is little or no variance in elevation), then the ICC will approximate zero; essentially all of the profile variance would be attributable to intraindividual variability. ICCs were calculated for all four scales of behavior using the variance estimates obtained from the uncon- ditional means models. As can be seen in Table 2, all ICCs hovered around .50. Within-subject and between-subject sources of variance therefore contributed equally to the total variance observed in the situation–behavior profiles. Individuals thus appear to demonstrate both substantial cross- situational consistencies and substantial cross-situational variabil- ity. In fact, there appears to be as much idiosyncratic intraindi- vidual variability in behavior as there is variability in the form of generalized individual differences, an impressive finding given that we had already removed the normative influences of situa- tions. There is justification then to examine the structure and stability of behavior, both across individuals and intraindividually. In our subsequent analyses, we explored the structure and stability of the elevation and shape of behavior. First, we asked whether the four dimensions of behavior are organized in adherence to the structure of the interpersonal circle. Then, we asked whether both dispositions and signatures constitute stable aspects of personality functioning. The Dimensional Structure of Dispositions and Signatures We had certain structural expectations concerning how the behavioral scales should intercorrelate: First, scales on opposing sides of the circle (i.e., dominance and submissiveness, agreeable- ness and quarrelsomeness) should be significantly and inversely correlated and, second, scales at right angles on the circle (e.g., dominance and agreeableness, submissiveness and quarrelsome- ness) should be uncorrelated. These structural relations in the behavior of individuals have previously been demonstrated across individuals (Moskowitz, 1994); whether these same structural re- lations are also present intraindividually has yet to be demon- strated. We began by examining these structural relations across indi- viduals, at the level of individuals’ behavioral dispositions. First, we aggregated profile scores intraindividually to determine each participant’s elevation along each scale of behavior. Then, we calculated the between-subject correlation coefficients between all possible pairs of behavioral scales. The between-subject correla- tion indexed the extent to which individual differences in mean levels along one behavioral dimension (e.g., dominance) were correlated with individual differences in mean levels along another behavioral dimension (e.g., submissiveness). The correlation was calculated at the level of the sample, and so was based on N  50. We predicted that elevations on scales of behavior from opposing sides of the circle would be significantly and inversely correlated, and this is what we found (see Table 3). Scales of behavior from opposing sides of the circle yielded the largest correlations; in contrast, correlations between adjacent behavioral scales did not differ significantly from zero. These findings suggest that there are two basic dimensions to the between-subject organization of be- havior, as shown previously by Moskowitz (1994). We then tested this set of structural predictions intraindividu- ally, at the level of individuals’ behavioral signatures. We calcu- lated within-subject correlation coefficients for all pairs of behav- ioral scales. The within-subject correlation indexed the extent to which the cross-situational patterning of an individual’s behavior along one dimension (e.g., dominance) was correlated with the cross-situational patterning of that same individual’s behavior along another dimension (e.g., submissiveness). The correlation was calculated at the level of the individual, and so was based on n  4. We then subjected these coefficients to Fisher’s r-to-z transformation, obtained the sample means and confidence inter- vals, and then back-transformed these statistics, z-to-r. We tested whether the mean structural coefficients for the sample differed significantly from zero using the SAS MEANS procedure. We predicted that the patterning of behavior along scales from oppos- ing sides of the circle would be significantly and inversely corre- lated, and this is what we found (see Table 4). Scales of behavior from opposing sides of the circle yielded the largest correlations; in contrast, correlations between adjacent behavioral scales either did not significantly differ from zero or, if significantly different from zero, were about half the size of the correlations obtained with scales of behavior from opposing sides of the circle. The pattern of findings obtained from the between-subject cor- relations was mirrored by the pattern of findings obtained from averaging the within-subject correlations for the whole sample. The normative structural arrangement of behavioral characteristics within the individual thus closely parallels the organization of these same behavioral characteristics when they are instead con- ceptualized as generalized individual differences. However, the within-subject correlations for many individuals departed substan- tially from this normative arrangement; indeed, the within-subject correlations spanned virtually the entire length of the correlation continuum. It would seem that the behavior of some individuals is not organized intraindividually in strict adherence to the structure of the interpersonal circle. The Dynamic Stability of Dispositions and Signatures In a final series of analyses we examined the stability of both dispositions and signatures. The available data for each participant were randomly divided in half. Therefore, if a participant had provided 60 agreeable–dominant events, 40 agreeable–submissive Table 2 Sources of Variation in the Idiographic Organization of Behavior Behavior 2 00 ICC Dominance .49 .49 .50 Agreeableness .46 .52 .53 Submissiveness .53 .45 .45 Quarrelsomeness .52 .46 .47 Note. 2  within-subject variance; 00  between-subject variance; intraclass correlation (ICC)  00/( 2  00). 538 FOURNIER, MOSKOWITZ, AND ZUROFF events, 19 quarrelsome–submissive events, and 21 quarrelsome– dominant events, then these totals would have been split 30/30, 20/20, 9/10, and 10/11, respectively. Scores in each half were aggregated within situations to produce two situation-behavior profiles for each participant. The profiles were rescaled within situations as z scores (M  0, SD  1) to identify each partici- pant’s distinct profile of behavioral variability across the four interpersonal situations. Standardizing within situations removes the nomothetic influences of situations on behavior, thus allowing each profile to reflect the participant’s idiographic pattern of situation–behavior contingencies in units of standard deviation from the typical level of behavior observed in each situation. The stability of behavioral dispositions was indexed by calcu- lating the between-subject correlation coefficient, which estimated the degree of similarity between the elevations for the two profile halves. The between-subject correlation indexed the extent to which individual differences in mean levels of behavior in one half of the data were correlated with individual differences in mean levels of behavior in another half of the data. The correlation was calculated at the level of the sample and so was based on N  50. As the stability coefficient was to some extent dependent upon how the data had been randomized, we repeated the randomization procedure 1,000 times. We subjected these coefficients to Fisher’s r-to-z transformation, aggregated them to obtain the mean stability estimates, and then back-transformed these statistics, z-to-r. We tested whether the mean stability coefficients for the sample dif- fered significantly from zero using the SAS MEANS procedure. As expected, the mean level of stability for each scale of behavior was significantly greater than zero (see Table 5). Stability esti- mates for all dimensions of behavior hovered around .80. The behavioral disposition thus appears to be an extremely stable facet of personality organization. Presumably, these aggregated stability coefficients have a smaller standard error than what we would usually expect for a single correlation, as the mean stability estimates are less subject to the sampling error associated with the specific randomization of the data. However, given that the 1,000 iterations were calculated from the same sample, we could not calculate the confidence interval around each mean stability estimate in the usual manner, as the assumption of independent samples had been violated. Therefore, bootstrapped confidence intervals (Efron, 1981, 1985; Efron & Tibshirani, 1986, 1993) were calculated. Bootstrapping is a computation-intensive, nonparametric resampling procedure for estimating statistical accuracy. It involves drawing random sam- ples from the original data pool and calculating the statistics of interest in each of these random samples. The procedure calls for sampling with replacement, thus allowing each subject to be drawn from the pool once, twice, many times, or even not at all. There- fore, even though each random sample is the same size as the original pool from which it was drawn, the exact composition of each random sample varies, as some subjects are selected more than once and other subjects are not selected at all. The statistic of interest is calculated separately in each of the random samples, and the distribution of this statistic across the random samples provides a bootstrapped estimate of the sampling distribution. The confi- dence intervals reported here were based on 1,000 bootstrapped samples (N  50 in each sample). The stability of behavioral signatures was indexed by the within-subject correlation coefficient, which estimated the degree of similarity between the shapes of two profile halves. The within- subject correlation indexed the extent to which the cross-situational Table 3 Structure of Behavioral Dispositions Behavior Structural estimate 95% C.I. Opposite axes Dominance, submissiveness .65*** .78, .45 Agreeableness, quarrelsomeness .73*** .84, .57 Adjacent axes Dominance, agreeableness .27 .51, .01 Agreeableness, submissiveness .07 .34, .22 Submissiveness, quarrelsomeness .27 .51, .01 Quarrelsomeness, dominance .00 .28, .28 Note. N  50. Structural correlation coefficients were calculated between subjects between pairs of behavioral scales. Profile scores were first aggregated intraindividually to determine each participant’s elevation along each scale of behavior. Then, correlations between all pairs of behavioral scales were calculated. C.I.  confidence intervals. *** p  .001. Table 4 Structure of Behavioral Signatures Behavior Structural estimate 95% C.I. Opposite axes Dominance, submissiveness .69*** .81, .53 Agreeableness, quarrelsomeness .71*** .81, .57 Adjacent axes Dominance, agreeableness .35** .52, .16 Agreeableness, submissiveness .11 .36, .15 Submissiveness, quarrelsomeness .39** .57, .17 Quarrelsomeness, dominance .19 .41, .06 Note. N  50. Structural correlation coefficients were calculated within subjects (n  4 situations) between pairs of behavioral scales. Coefficients were subjected to Fisher’s r-to-z transformation prior to meta-analysis. Mean stability coefficients and 95% confidence intervals (C.I.) were then back-transformed, z-to-r, before being reported here. ** p  .01. *** p  .001. Table 5 Stability of Behavioral Dispositions Behavior Stability estimate 95% C.I. Dominance .76*** .61, .86 Agreeableness .77*** .64, .86 Submissiveness .82*** .69, .90 Quarrelsomeness .83*** .71, .90 Note. N  50. Stability correlation coefficients were calculated between subjects through an iterative procedure. The data for each participant were first randomly divided to form two separate profiles. This step yielded two samples, each with 50 profiles. Each profile half was aggregated intrain- dividually to determine its elevation, and then these two sets of scores were correlated together. This process was repeated 1,000 times. Coefficients were subjected to Fisher’s r-to-z transformation and averaged together. Confidence intervals (C.I.) were estimated from 1,000 bootstrapped sam- ples (n  50 in each sample). Mean stability coefficients and 95% C.I. were then back-transformed, z-to-r, before being reported here. *** p  .001. 539DISPOSITIONS AND SIGNATURES patterning of an individual’s behavior in one half of his or her data was correlated with the cross-situational patterning of that same individual’s behavior in another half of his or her data. The correlation was calculated at the level of the individual and so was based on n  4. This procedure is illustrated by the sample situation–behavior profile depicted in Figure 2. As can be seen, the participant displays an exaggerated pattern of reciprocity, reporting above-mean levels of submissiveness (i.e., positive z scores) in situations where the other was seen as having behaved dominantly and below-mean levels of submissiveness (i.e., negative z scores) in situations where the other was seen as having behaved submissively. When the participant’s data are divided in half to produce two situation–behavior profiles from nonoverlapping sets of occasions, the two sets of scores dem- onstrate a high degree of resemblance (r  .91). As each stability estimate obtained was to some extent dependent on how the data had been randomized, we repeated this proce- dure 1,000 times for each participant. This iterative process yielded 50,000 stability coefficients, nested within 50 participants. We sub- jected these coefficients to Fisher’s r-to-z transformation, aggregated the 1,000 stability coefficients from each participant, obtained the sample means and confidence intervals, and then back-transformed these statistics, z-to-r. We tested whether the mean stability coeffi- cients for the sample differed significantly from zero using the SAS MEANS procedure. As expected, the mean level of stability for each scale of behavior was significantly greater than zero (see Table 6). Stability estimates for all dimensions of behavior hovered around .30. The behavioral signature thus appears to be a moderately stable facet of personality organization. Discussion The purpose of the present research was to outline an integrative framework in which dispositions and signatures could both be conceptualized as facets of behavioral organization in the inter- personal domain. We used units of behavior and situations from the interpersonal circle to comprehensively sample the domain of day-to-day social interaction. Our findings suggest that (a) profiles of situation–behavior contingencies conform to the principles of interpersonal complementarity, (b) the extent of consistency and variability in behavior is approximately equal when normative situational influences have been removed, (c) both dispositions and signatures display a two-dimensional structure consistent with the interpersonal circle, and (d) both dispositions and signatures con- stitute stable aspects of personality functioning. The Nomothetic Organization of Situation–Behavior Contingencies Our first set of predictions concerned the normative influences of situations on behavior. Interpersonalists hold that each person’s behavior tends to elicit, evoke, or invite from another person a complementary class of behavior in return (Kiesler, 1983; Leary, 1957). The rules of complementarity are the conventions of human interaction, and we expected to see evidence of these conventions in the raw situation– behavior profiles. Complementarity was clearly evident. Only the patterning of submissiveness across sit- uations departed substantially from prediction; rates of submis- siveness were lower than expected in situations in which the other behaved both agreeably and dominantly. These findings replicate evidence of complementarity in behavior found using different methods of assessment (e.g., Sadler & Woody, 2003; Tracey, 1994). The Idiographic Organization of Situation–Behavior Contingencies Our second set of predictions concerned the extent of consis- tency and variability in behavior. Social-cognitivists like Mischel (1999), Shoda (1999), and Cervone (1999) have maintained that -2 -1 0 1 2 AD AS QS QD Situation Su bm is si ve ne ss Figure 2. An example of idiographic situation–behavior contingencies. Profiles were first standardized to remove the nomothetic influences of situations. The lines indicate considerable stability in the patterning of the individual’s submissive behavior across situations (r  .91) from two separate, nonoverlapping samples of occasions (1 of the 1,000 such random divisions of this individual’s data). AD  agreeable–dominant; AS  agreeable–submissive; QS  quarrelsome–submissive; QD  quarrelsome–dominant. Table 6 Stability of Behavioral Signatures Behavior Stability estimate 95% C.I. Dominance .24** .08, .39 Agreeableness .39*** .24, .53 Submissiveness .32** .14, .48 Quarrelsomeness .52*** .35, .65 Note. N  50. Stability correlation coefficients were calculated within subjects (n  4 situations) through an iterative procedure. The data for each participant were randomly divided to form two separate profiles that were then correlated together, a process we repeated 1,000 times for each participant. Coefficients were subjected to Fisher’s r-to-z transformation and averaged together. Mean stability coefficients and 95% confidence intervals (C.I.) were then back-transformed, z-to-r, before being reported here. ** p  .01. *** p  .001. 540 FOURNIER, MOSKOWITZ, AND ZUROFF people show stability in the intraindividual patterning of their behavior around situational norms and influences. We expected to find, once we removed the normative influences of situations (i.e., the differences across situations in behavioral mean levels and variances), that there would still be substantial intraindividual variation in behavior. Removing the nomothetic influences of situations on behavior to reveal each participant’s idiographic pattern of situation–behavior contingencies, we found as much within-subject variation as between-subject variation in behavior. There is thus evidence for both individual differences and intrain- dividual fluctuations in the organization of behavior. Behavior across situations is to some extent consistent and to some extent variable. Although there is irrefutable evidence of traits in behav- ior, there is also more to the organization of behavior than traits. The Dimensional Structure of Dispositions and Signatures Our third set of predictions concerned the structure of behavior. We predicted that behavior would conform to a two-dimensional structure, and indeed, this was the case. Both across individuals and intraindividually, the agentic and communal dimensions of behavior were clearly evident. Dominance was significantly and inversely correlated with submissiveness, and agreeableness was significantly and inversely correlated with quarrelsomeness. Fur- thermore, both across individuals and intraindividually, the corre- lations obtained for behavioral scales from opposite sides of the circle were typically at least twice the size of those obtained for those behavioral scales from adjacent sides of the circle. Although the intraindividual structural correlations for the sam- ple were consistent with the structure of the interpersonal circle, there were also departures from the expected pattern of correla- tions. The behavior of some individuals is not organized intrain- dividually in adherence to the expected circular structure. What factors might account for idiosyncratic departures from the nor- mative structure of the interpersonal circle? The answer may lie in the interpersonal beliefs and competencies of individuals (Ander- son & Chen, 2002; Baldwin, 1992; Mischel, 1973). For instance, some individuals may believe that to successfully assert their dominance they must also be quarrelsome; consequently, dominant behaviors that elevate the status of the self become correlated intraindividually with quarrelsome behaviors that subordinate the status of others. Alternatively, some individuals may lack the behavioral competencies necessary to establish, restore, or main- tain affiliations without also being submissive; consequently, agreeable behaviors that focus on the concerns, interests, and needs of others become correlated intraindividually with submis- sive behaviors that subordinate the concerns, interests, and needs of the self. The Dynamic Stability of Dispositions and Signatures Our final set of predictions concerned the stability of behavior. We predicted that mean levels of stability would be significantly greater than zero for both dispositions and signatures, and indeed this was the case for all dimensions of behavior. Levels of stability obtained here for dispositions were comparable to those found previously by Fleeson (2001). Levels of stability obtained here for signatures were comparable to those found previously by Shoda et al. (1994). Although stability estimates were considerably larger for dispositions than for signatures, we should recall that signa- tures constitute less aggregated features of personality than dispo- sitions. The stability of dispositions was tested using scores ob- tained by aggregating across all situations. In contrast, the stability of signatures was tested using scores obtained by aggregating separately within each situation. Given that stability estimates increase with aggregation across situations (Epstein, 1979, 1980; Moskowitz, 1982, 1988), the different levels of stability for dis- positions and signatures are thus consistent with the differences in their respective methods of score construction. These findings suggest that idiographic variability of behavior around the nomothetic influences of situations is not necessarily error; rather, for many individuals this intraindividual variability constitutes a stable aspect of personality functioning. Why then do individuals stray from the rules of complementarity, the conven- tions of dyadic interaction? Why is it, for instance, that some individuals do not submit when the other acts dominantly, in spite of their partner’s behavior inviting and urging them to do so? The answer may lie in the interpersonal goals and motives underlying the behavior of individuals (Horowitz et al., 2006). Wiggins (1980) defined complementary interactions as those in which the behavior of the respondent accepts the meaning of the interpersonal situa- tion as it is defined by the behavior of the original actor; so, the respondent’s submissiveness complements the original actor’s dominance in that it accepts the meaning of the interpersonal situation as one in which the original actor holds status over the respondent. However, individuals may have interpersonal goals and motives that encourage them to challenge the meaning of the situation as it is defined by the behavior of those with whom they interact. Individuals with agentic goals and motives (e.g., activists) may display stable intraindividual patterns of behavior that do not conform with the nomothetic rule of reciprocity, whereas individ- uals with noncommunal goals and motives (e.g., isolationists) may display stable intraindividual patterns of behavior that do not conform with the nomothetic rule of correspondence. A Unified Framework There is potentially much to gain from integrating social– cognitive and interpersonal approaches. The intraindividual orga- nization of behavior is difficult to study in part because it is not entirely obvious how one ought to carve situations into psycho- logically meaningful units. The present research shows how the interpersonal circle provides psychologically meaningful dimen- sions along which situations and behavior can be classified, thereby giving us a means through which to investigate the “psy- chologically active features of situations” (Shoda et al., 1994, p. 685). The interpersonal model supplies constructs with which to comprehensively sample the domain of the antecedent situations (“if. . . ”) and behavioral consequences (“then. . .”), the x- and y-axes of the situation–behavior profile. The resulting theoretical integration, which brings together both person-centered and variable-centered perspectives, provides a taxonomy (albeit spe- cific to one domain of personality functioning) for the situations and behaviors in which dispositions and signatures manifest. Fur- 541DISPOSITIONS AND SIGNATURES thermore, the resulting theoretical integration suggests that one underlying system of interrelated structures and processes is ca- pable of producing both trait-like consistencies and signature patterns of variability. In contrast to those who equate traits with structure and signa- tures with process, we suggest that both dispositions and signatures must be viewed as the emergent outcomes of within-person struc- tures and processes. Mischel and Shoda (1995, 1998, 1999) have repeatedly argued that the cross-situational variability of behavior does not prove instability in the underlying structure of personal- ity, as stable intraindividual processing dynamics are required for individuals to demonstrate stable variability in behavior. However, their attention to the situational specificity of behavior has poten- tially understated how a systems approach can account for the production of behavioral dispositions (cross-situational consisten- cies) as readily as it can for the production of behavioral signatures (cross-situational patterns of variability). Although we agree with Mischel and Shoda (1998) that “if it is a processing system, then it must respond to changing conditions” (p. 242), the processing system need not respond to situational changes with conspicuous changes in behavior. A process approach to personality is also necessary to account for the ways through which individuals render superficially dissimilar situations functionally equivalent (Allport, 1937), thereby producing consistencies in behavior de- spite situational variability. Personality processes are required to account for both mean levels of behavior and the stable organiza- tion of behavior around these mean levels. Lessons Learned What does this mean with respect to the longstanding person– situation controversy (Epstein, 1979, 1980; Mischel, 1968; Moskowitz, 1982, 1988)? There are several lessons to be learned here. First of all, the early situationist view (Mischel, 1968) was at least partly correct. Not all within-subject variance is error variance, and aggregating to a single point does throw away meaningful information (Wright & Mischel, 1987). The situationist view, however, was only partly correct. Not all within-subject variance is stable variance, and aggregating to a single point does reveal something meaningful about the struc- ture of behavior (Moskowitz & Schwarz, 1982). Stated posi- tively, there is stability in mean levels of behavior across situations (i.e., individuals’ dispositions) and stability in the patterning of behavior across situations (i.e., individuals’ sig- natures). This was surmised by Allport (1937) long ago (Zuroff, 1986) and has now been demonstrated in the behavior of both adults and children. These results also suggest a new way to think about interactionist models. Traditionally, interactionists have modeled the behavior of individuals nomothetically, by looking at how variation across individuals along a single trait dimension differentially predicts behavior across situations (i.e., Trait  Situation interactionist models). The present re- search suggests that interactionists can also model the behavior of individuals idiographically, by looking at how the behavior of each individual varies consistently and systematically across situations (i.e., Person  Situation interactionist models). Limitations and Future Directions We relied on event-contingent recording procedures that re- quired participants to report both on their own behavior as well as on the behavior of their interaction partners. This raises the pos- sibility that the results obtained are due to perceptual biases and/or implicit theories and not to real patterns of behavior. Although individuals respond to their own subjective interpretation of the situation and not to the situation itself, it would still be desirable to supplement these findings with methods that would permit the assessment of both consensually accepted and idiosyncratic ap- praisals of the situation. Round-robin ratings collected repeatedly from individuals engaged in small group interactions would allow researchers to partition these potential sources of variance in situational appraisals. We used event-contingent records in which situations and be- havior were recorded concurrently. Consequently, it is not possible to determine whether participants’ perceptions of interaction part- ners causally preceded their behavior or whether participants’ behavior causally preceded their perceptions of interaction part- ners. We adopted a theoretical framework in which behavior was assumed to follow from situational appraisals but acknowledge that the temporal sequence of events cannot be known. Laboratory observations of participants’ behavior in their interactions with friends and coworkers would allow us to capture the temporal sequencing of behavior and to model how participants’ behavior is both an interpersonal response to the prior behavior of their inter- action partners and an interpersonal bid for a particular behavioral response from their interaction partners. We required participants to provide at least seven interaction records in each of the four interpersonal situations to ensure an adequate level of resolution in estimating their behavior; a similar criterion was adopted by Shoda et al. (1994) in their study of the Camp Wediko children. However, adopting this criterion produced a final sample that was less than half the size of the one with which we started. Although this final sample did not differ significantly from excluded participants on any of the five-factor model or interpersonal circumplex model dimensions of personality, the question remains as to whether the two groups differed in other important ways. At the very least, the two groups differed in terms of the frequency with which they encountered each of the four interpersonal situations. Whether there were any other systematic personality differences between these two groups and whether such differences were correlated with the stability estimates ob- tained remain questions for future research. We utilized four categories of situation defined by the interper- sonal behavior of the interaction partner. Dividing each axis of the interpersonal grid at the midpoint seemed sensible, given that the midpoint corresponds to the conceptual breakpoint between bipo- lar contrasts (assured–dominant vs. unassured–submissive; cold– quarrelsome vs. warm–agreeable). Although there is always the regrettable loss of information when discrete categories are de- rived from continuous dimensions, the construction of situation– behavior profiles required us to convert the ordinal into the nom- inal. Categories were thus carved from the interpersonal circle with each category representing one quadrant. All categories were therefore of equal conceptual breadth, with the total number of situations comparable to the number utilized by Shoda et al. (1994). However, the interpersonal circle can be carved into any 542 FOURNIER, MOSKOWITZ, AND ZUROFF number of segments, from two halves to 360 degrees. The number of segments that can be meaningfully derived depends only on the number of interpersonal situations between which individuals can successfully discriminate and the number of data points one has (the more segments into which the circle is carved, the more data points one needs in order to ensure that an individual’s behavior has been estimated with an adequate level of resolution in each segment). Future research could address the question of whether profiles of situation–behavior contingencies are best served by carving the domain of interpersonal situations into four quadrants, eight octants, or some even larger number of segments. We assessed the stability of behavioral signatures through the within-subject correlation coefficient, which yields a standardized index of stability for each individual. One advantage of the within- subject correlation coefficient is that it is invariant across differ- ences in either elevation or scatter between the two profiles under consideration and as such provides an index of the stability of the patterning of behavior that is uncontaminated by differences in either the level or spread of scores between the two profiles. However, given that profiles are characterized by their elevation and scatter as well by their shape, we ideally would have liked to have been able to index the stability of these profile features as well for each individual. Although other statistics exist to index the degree of similarity between profiles, such as Cattell’s (1949) rp and Cronbach and Gleser’s (1953) D2, these statistics either are invariant across differences in elevation and scatter (like the cor- relation coefficient) or instead confound elevation, scatter, and shape in the estimation of profile similarity. To the best of our knowledge, statistics do not exist to uniquely estimate the similar- ity of either elevation or scatter in any two profiles as the corre- lation estimates the similarity of shape, and these methods need to be developed. We focused exclusively on situations and behavior relevant to the agentic and communal dimensions of personality functioning. The interpersonal domain, however, is but one of several domains in which individuals operate. There is an emerging consensus among researchers that five to seven dimensions account for virtually all personality trait variation observed in humans (Gold- berg, 1993; Saucier & Simonds, 2006) and that each of these trait dimensions speaks to a different domain of personality function- ing. Dimensions relevant to intrapersonal functioning—that is, conscientiousness and openness/intellect—would presumably yield a taxonomy of situations and behavior virtually orthogonal to the content of the interpersonal circle. The development of a comprehensive taxonomy of situations and behavior that summa- rizes all aspects of functioning, both interpersonal and intraper- sonal, remains a challenge for the field. We were able to demonstrate that the behavior for a substantial number of individuals could be characterized by stable intraindi- vidual patterns of variability across situations. These findings suggest the presence of idiographic processing dynamics that give rise to stable intraindividual patterns of behavior around the no- mothetic influences of situations. However, given that the field cannot proceed with samples of N  1, we are left with the enduring question of how to advance a science of personality that integrates the nomothetic and the idiographic. One approach may lie in the search for prototypic personality signatures around which the unique behavioral signatures of some individuals might cluster. Recently, Asendorpf (2006) showed how individuals could be characterized along dimensions of typeness indicating their departure from some prototypic personality profile, thereby pro- viding researchers with a continuous person-centered approach to personality data. Such an approach could allow us to translate the idiographic situation–behavior profiles of individuals back into a nomothetic language of individual differences. Conclusion The present research represented preliminary steps toward an integrative framework in which both dispositions and signatures are conceptualized as facets of behavioral organization. The structure and stability of behavior was tested with units of behavior and situations sampled from the interpersonal circle. We found that the behavior of individuals could be character- ized in terms of a mean level (disposition) and a stable orga- nization around that mean level (signature). Both dispositions and signatures were found to display a two-dimensional struc- ture consistent with the interpersonal circle, and both disposi- tions and signatures were found to constitute stable aspects of personality functioning. On the basis of these findings, we recommend the continued development of theoretical models that incorporate both dispositions and signatures; further re- search into the interpersonal goals, beliefs, expectancies, and competencies underlying the behavior of individuals in their day-to-day social interactions; and the search for prototypic personality signatures that will integrate the nomothetic with the idiographic. References Allport, G. W. (1937). Personality: A psychological interpretation. New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston. Anderson, S. M., & Chen, S. (2002). The relational self: An interpersonal social-cognitive theory. Psychological Review, 109, 619–645. Asendorpf, J. (2006). Typeness of personality profiles. European Journal of Personality, 20, 83–106. Baird, B. M., Le, K., & Lucas, R. E. (2006). On the nature of intraindi- vidual personality variability: Reliability, validity, and associations with well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 512–527. Bakan, D. (1966). The duality of human existence. Skokie, IL: Rand McNally. Baldwin, M. W. (1992). Relational schemas and the processing of social information. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 461–484. Borkenau, P., & Ostendorf, F. (1998). The Big Five as states: How useful is the five-factor model to describe intraindividual variations over time? Journal of Research in Personality, 32, 202–221. Cattell, R. B. (1949). rp and other coefficients of pattern similarity. Psy- chometrika, 14, 279–298. Cervone, D. (1999). Bottom-up explanation in personality psychology: The case of cross-situational coherence. In D. Cervone & Y. Shoda (Eds.), The coherence of personality: Social-cognitive bases of con- sistency, variability, and organization (pp. 303–341). New York: Guilford Press. Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). The NEO-PI-R: Professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1997). Longitudinal stability of adult personality. In R. Hogan, & J. A. Johnson, & S. R. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 269–290). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Cronbach, L. J., & Gleser, G. C. (1953). Assessing similarity between profiles. Psychological Bulletin, 6, 456–473. 543DISPOSITIONS AND SIGNATURES Efron, B. (1981). Nonparametric estimates of standard error: The jack- knife, the bootstrap and other methods. Biometrika, 68, 589–599. Efron, B. (1985). Bootstrap confidence intervals for a class of parametric problems. Biometrika, 72, 45–58. Efron, B., & Tibshirani, R. (1986). Bootstrap methods for standard errors, confidence intervals, and other measures of statistical accuracy. Statis- tical Science, 1, 54–77. Efron, B., & Tibshirani, R. J. (1993). An introduction to the bootstrap. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC. Eid, M., & Diener, E. (1999). Intraindividual variability in affect: Reli- ability, validity, and personality correlates. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 662–676. Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: I. On predicting most of the people much of the time. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1097–1126. Epstein, S. (1980). The stability of behavior: II. Implications for psycho- logical research. American Psychologist, 35, 790–806. Fleeson, W. (2001). Toward a structure- and process-integrated view of personality: Traits as density distributions of states. Journal of Person- ality and Social Psychology, 80, 1011–1027. Fleeson, W. (2007). Situation-based contingencies underlying trait-content manifestation in behavior. Journal of Personality, 75, 825–861. Freedman, M. B., Leary, T. F., Ossario, A. G., & Coffey, H. S. (1951). The interpersonal dimension of personality. Journal of Personality, 20, 143– 161. Goldberg, L. R. (1993). The structure of phenotypic personality traits. American Psychologist, 48, 26–34. Horowitz, L. M., Rosenberg, S. E., Baer, B. A., Ureno, G., & Vallasenor, V. S. (1988). Inventory of interpersonal problems: Psychometric prop- erties and clinical applications. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 885–892. Horowitz, L. M., Wilson, K. R., Turan, B., Zolotsev, P., Constantino, M. J., & Henderson, L. (2006). How interpersonal motives clarify the meaning of interpersonal behavior: The revised circumplex model. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10, 67–86. Kiesler, D. J. (1983). The 1982 interpersonal circle: A taxonomy for complementarity in human transactions. Psychological Review, 90, 185– 214. LaForge, R., Leary, T. F., Naboisek, H., Coffey, H. S., & Freedman, M. B. (1954). The interpersonal dimension of personality: II. An objective study of repression. Journal of Personality, 23, 129–153. Leary, T. (1957). Interpersonal diagnosis of personality. New York: Ro- nald. McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1996). Toward a new generation of personality theories: Theoretical contexts for the five-factor model. In J. S. Wiggins (Ed.), The five-factor model of personality: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 51–87). New York: Guilford Press. Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. New York: Wiley. Mischel, W. (1973). Toward a cognitive social learning reconceptualiza- tion of personality. Psychological Review, 80, 252–283. Mischel, W. (1999). Personality coherence and dispositions in a cognitive- affective personality system (CAPS) approach. In D. Cervone & Y. Shoda (Eds.), The coherence of personality: Social-cognitive bases of consistency, variability, and organization (pp. 37–60). New York: Guil- ford Press. Mischel, W. (2004). Toward an integrative science of the person. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 1–22. Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective system theory of personality: Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality structure. Psychological Review, 102, 246– 268. Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1998). Reconciling processing dynamics and personality dispositions. Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 229 –258. Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1999). Integrating dispositions and processing dynamics within a unified theory of personality: The cognitive-affective personality system. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd ed.; pp. 197–218). New York: Guilford Press. Moskowitz, D. S. (1982). Coherence and cross-situational generality in personality: A new analysis of old problems. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 754–768. Moskowitz, D. S. (1988). Cross-situational generality in the laboratory: Dominance and friendliness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- ogy, 54, 829–839. Moskowitz, D. S. (1994). Cross-situational generality and the interpersonal circumplex. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 921–933. Moskowitz, D. S., & Schwarz, J. C. (1982). Validity comparison of behavior counts and ratings by knowledgeable informants. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 518–528. Moskowitz, D. S., Suh, E. J., & Desaulniers, J. (1994). Situational influ- ences on gender differences in agency and communion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 753–761. Moskowitz, D. S., & Zuroff, D. C. (2004). Flux, pulse, and spin: Dynamic additions to the personality lexicon. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 880–893. Moskowitz, D. S., & Zuroff, D. C. (2005). Assessing interpersonal per- ceptions using the interpersonal grid. Psychological Assessment, 17, 218–230. Ozer, D. J., & Benet-Martı́nez, V. (2006). Personality and the prediction of consequential outcomes. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 401–421. Roberts, B. W., Kuncel, N. R., Shiner, R. L., Caspi, A., & Goldberg, L. R. (2007). The power of personality: The comparative validity of person- ality traits, socio-economic status, and cognitive ability for predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives in Psychological Science, 2, 313– 345. Roberts, B. W., & Wood, D. (2006). Personality development in the context of the Neo-Socioanalytic Model of personality. In D. K. Mroc- zek & T. D. Little (Eds.), Handbook of personality development (pp. 11–39). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Sadler, P., & Wood, E. (2003). Is it who you are or who you’re talking to? Interpersonal style and complementarity in mixed-sex interactions. Jour- nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 80–95. SAS Institute. (1999). SAS/STAT user’s guide, Version 8. Cary, NC: Author. Saucier, G., Bel-Bahar, T., & Fernandez, C. (2007). What modifies the expression of personality tendencies? Defining basic domains of situa- tion variables. Journal of Personality, 75, 479–503. Saucier, G., & Simonds, J. (2006). The structure of personality and tem- perament. In D. K. Mroczek & T. D. Little (Eds.), Handbook of per- sonality development (pp. 109–128). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Shoda, Y. (1999). Behavioral expressions of a personality system: Gener- ation and perception of behavioral signatures. In D. Cervone & Y. Shoda (Eds.), The coherence of personality: Social-cognitive bases of consis- tency, variability, and organization (pp. 155–181). New York: Guilford Press. Shoda, Y., Mischel, W., & Wright, J. C. (1994). Intraindividual stability in the organization and patterning of behavior: Incorporating psychological situations into the idiographic analysis of personality. Journal of Per- sonality and Social Psychology, 67, 674–687. Suh, E. J., Moskowitz, D. S., Fournier, M. A., & Zuroff, D. C. (2004). Gender and relationships: Influences on agentic and communal behav- iors. Personal Relationships, 11, 41–60. Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New York: W. W. Norton. Tracey, T. J. (1994). An examination of the complementarity of interper- sonal behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 864– 878. 544 FOURNIER, MOSKOWITZ, AND ZUROFF Wiggins, J. S. (1980). Circumplex models of interpersonal behavior. In L. Wheeler (Ed.), Review of personality and social psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 265–294). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Wiggins, J. S. (1982). Circumplex models of interpersonal behavior in clinical psychology. In P. C. Kendall & J. N. Butcher (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in clinical psychology (pp. 183–221). New York: Wiley. Wiggins, J. S. (1995). Interpersonal Adjective Scales: Professional man- ual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. Wright, J. C., & Mischel, W. (1987). A conditional approach to disposi- tional constructs: The local predictability of social behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 1159–1177. Zuroff, D. C. (1986). Was Gordon Allport a trait theorist? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 993–1000. Received September 7, 2006 Revision received October 12, 2007 Accepted October 16, 2007  Correction to Amodio et al. (2008) In the article “Individual Differences in the Regulation of Intergroup Bias: The Role of Conflict Monitoring and Neural Signals for Control,” by David M. Amodio, Patricia G. Devine, and Eddie Harmon-Jones (Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2008, Vol. 94, No. 1, pp. 60–74), there was an error in Figure 4. The figure should appear as follows: Figure 4. Mediation model illustrating how the difference between high-IMS/low-EMS and high- IMS/high-EMS participants’ response accuracy on trials requiring the inhibition of automatic stereotyping (Black–tool trials) was accounted for by error-related negativity (ERN) amplitudes on Black–tool trials. Betas are reported (beta in parentheses represents the effect of group on response accuracy before ERN scores were included in the regression model). Larger ERNs are represented by more negative values. *p  .05. **p  .01. DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.3.545 545DISPOSITIONS AND SIGNATURES