10.1037@0278-7393.34.3.533.pdf
aEVLxqSPH_rXbqRKy4lJcpDQBvO8-10.1037_0278_7393.34.3.533.pdf.plain.html

The Impact of Stimulus and Response Variability on S–R Correspondence Effects Peter Wühr and Rupert Biebl Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Ulrich Ansorge Universität Osnabrück Six experiments investigated how variability on irrelevant stimulus dimensions and variability on response dimensions contribute to spatial and nonspatial stimulus–response ( S–R ) correspondence effects .
Experiments 1–3 showed that , when stimuli varied in location and number , S–R correspondence effects for location or numerosity occurred when responses varied on these dimensions but not when responses were invariant on these dimensions .
These results are consistent with the response- discrimination account , according to which S–R correspondence effects should only arise for a dimension that is used for discriminating between responses in working memory .
Experiments 4–6 showed that , when responses varied in location and number , both invariant and variable stimulus number produced correspondence effects in S–R numerosity .
In summary , the present results indicate that the usefulness of a particular dimension for response discrimination can be sufficient for producing S–R correspondence effects , whereas variability of a stimulus dimension is not sufficient for producing such effects .
Keywords : stimulus variability , response variability , S–R correspondence , Simon effect , working memory Investigating the effects of stimulus–response ( S–R ) correspon- dence reveals important insights into the functional organization of human action control and response selection ( see Proctor & Vu , 2006 , for an overview ) .
The present study , for example , investi- gates how variability of spatial and nonspatial response features affects the occurrence of S–R correspondence effects on a partic- ular dimension to determine which features are used to cognitively represent and to select between responses .
A particularly interesting phenomenon of spatial S–R corre- spondence is the Simon effect .
In a typical Simon task , participants press a left-side key to a green stimulus and a right-side key to a red stimulus while stimuli appear randomly to the left or to the right of fixation .
In this task , spatially corresponding conditions ( left green S , right red S ) produce faster responses and higher accuracy than spatially noncorresponding conditions ( left red S , right green S ) .
This finding , denoted the Simon effect , shows that spatial S–R correspondence affects performance even when stim- ulus location is irrelevant for the task at hand ( e.g. , Simon & Rudell , 1967 ; see Proctor & Vu , 2006 , for a review ) .
Nonspatial variants of the Simon effect have also been reported .
For example , Kunde and Stöcker ( 2002 ) demonstrated a Simon effect with regard to the correspondence between the duration of stimuli and responses .
In particular , these authors showed that short keypresses were initiated more quickly to stimuli with short duration than to stimuli with long duration , whereas the opposite result was observed with long keypresses .
More recently , Miller ( 2006 ) demonstrated a Simon effect with regard to the correspon- dence between the numerosity of stimuli and responses .
In partic- ular , he showed that a single keypress was initiated more quickly to one stimulus than to a pair of stimuli , whereas the opposite result was observed for a sequence of two keypresses .
The most popular account of spatial Simon effects makes three assumptions .
The first assumption is that an attention shift to the location of the imperative stimulus produces a spatial stimulus code ( e.g. , Nicoletti & Umiltà , 1994 ; see Stoffer & Umiltà , 1997 , for a review , but see Hommel , 1993b , for an alternative account ) .
The second assumption is that the spatial stimulus code automat- ically activates a spatially corresponding response code .
In partic- ular , dual-route models assume that the spatial stimulus code activates a spatially corresponding response code on a so-called direct route of response activation , while the relevant stimulus code is used to determine the correct response on an indirect route of response selection ( e.g. , De Jong , Liang , & Lauber , 1994 ; Kornblum , Hasbroucq , & Osman , 1990 ; Zhang , Zhang , & Korn- blum , 1999 ; Zorzi & Umiltà , 1995 ) .
In corresponding conditions of the Simon task both routes coactivate the same response , which facilitates responding .
In noncorresponding conditions of the Si- mon task , however , each route activates a different response , causing a response conflict , which delays responding or produces an error .
Hence , Simon effects ( i.e. , the difference between corre- sponding and noncorresponding conditions ) result from facilitation in corresponding conditions and from interference in noncorre- sponding conditions ( e.g. , Zorzi & Umiltà , 1995 ) .
Finally , the third assumption concerns the structural basis for Simon effects to arise .
Many authors believe that the indirect route for response selection rests on short-term associations between stimulus and response codes in working memory ( WM ) , whereas the direct route is Peter Wühr and Rupert Biebl , Institut für Psychologie , Friedrich- Alexander-Universität , Erlangen , Germany ; Ulrich Ansorge , Institut für Humanwissenschaften , Universität Osnabrück , Osnabrück , Germany .
The German Science Foundation supported this research through Grant Wu 357/2-1 to Peter Wühr .
We thank Bianca Roth for running the partic- ipants .
We also thank Thomas Kleinsorge and Iring Koch for insightful comments on previous versions of this article .
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Peter Wühr , Friedrich-Alexander-Universität , Kochstrasse 4 , 91054 Erlangen , Germany .
E-mail : peter.wuehr @ psy.phil.uni-erlangen.de Journal of Experimental Psychology : Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association Learning , Memory , and Cognition 2008 , Vol .
34 , No .
3 , 533–545 0278-7393/08/ $ 12.00 DOI : 10.1037/0278-7393.34.3.533 533 believed to rest on long-term associations between spatial stimulus codes and spatial motor codes ( e.g. , Tagliabue , Zorzi , Umiltà , & Bassignani , 2000 ; Zhang et al. , 1999 ; Zorzi & Umiltà , 1995 ) .
Similar dual-route models have been proposed to account for nonspatial variants of the Simon effect ( e.g. , Kunde & Stöcker , 2002 ; Miller , 2006 ) .
The main evidence for the assumption that location-based re- sponse activation results from long-term S–R associations comes from investigations of the lateralized readiness potential ( LRP ) .
The LRP is an electrophysiological correlate of response activation in primary motor cortex ( M1 ) and supplementary motor area ( SMA ) , indicating whether the left or the right hand is activated more strongly ( Coles , 1989 ) .
Some studies showed that irrelevant stimulus location can activate the “ incorrect ” motor cortex in noncorresponding trials of the Simon task ( reflected in the so- called “ Gratton dip ” ) before the correct hand is being selected , which was taken to indicate automatic response activation on the basis of long-term S–R associations ( e.g. , De Jong et al. , 1994 , Experiment 4 ; Valle-Inclan , 1996 , Experiment 3 ) .
The LRP evi- dence in favor of “ hard-wired ” spatial S–R links was challenged by Valle-Inclan and Redondo ( 1998 ) .
These authors replicated “ incorrect ” response activation in noncorresponding Simon trials when participants were informed about the relevant S–R mapping before the imperative stimulus was shown .
It is important to note , however , that they failed to observe “ incorrect ” response activa- tion in noncorresponding Simon trials when participants received the imperative stimulus before they were informed about the relevant S–R mapping .
This result suggests that location-based response activation in the Simon task does not rest on long-term S–R associations that circumvent WM .
Instead , the Simon effect— and , by implication , activation of the direct route—appears to depend upon the S–R mapping being represented in WM .
To account for this result and related findings , Ansorge and Wühr ( 2004 ) proposed a response-discrimination account of the Simon effect .
The central claim is that the Simon effect arises in WM from the interaction of codes representing stimulus location and codes representing response location .
Moreover , the account claims that participants can flexibly represent responses in WM ( see also Hommel , Müsseler , Aschersleben , & Prinz , 2001 ) and that Simon effects will only arise if participants use spatial fea- tures , or spatial labels , for response representation in WM .
Ac- cording to this view , the Simon effect does not arise from direct interactions between spatial stimulus codes and spatial response ( i.e. , motor ) codes .
Instead , the Simon effect is attributed to the interaction between spatial stimulus codes and codes representing responses in WM .
In particular , we assume that spatial stimulus codes tend to activate spatially or conceptually corresponding response labels in WM .
A natural prediction of the response-discrimination account is that participants will use the location feature for representing different responses in WM when responses vary on a spatial dimension , and therefore location can be used to discriminate and choose between responses .
By contrast , Simon effects should not arise for a spatial dimension when the responses remain invariant on that dimension , even when location has to be considered for the correct execution of each response .
Ansorge and Wühr ( 2004 ) provided a first test of this prediction .
In their experiments , stimuli always varied on the horizontal and on the vertical dimensions and , therefore , Simon effects could be expected on both dimensions .
It is important to note , however , that the authors varied the response sets between experiments to manipulate the utility of each spatial dimension for response discrimination .
In their Experiment 2 , for example , participants had to choose between pressing a lower left key and an upper right key on the basis of stimulus color .
In this situation , both response dimensions could be used for discriminat- ing responses , and Simon effects occurred for both spatial S–R dimensions .
By contrast , in Experiment 1 , participants had to choose between pressing a lower left key and an upper left key , which renders only the vertical dimension useful for response discrimination .
Consistent with the response-discrimination ac- count , the authors observed Simon effects for the vertical dimen- sion only ( for further support of the response-discrimination ac- count , see Ansorge & Wühr , 2004 ; Gevers , Lammertyn , Notebaert , Verguts , & Fias , 2006 ; and Wühr & Ansorge , 2007 ) .
The observed selectivity of spatial Simon effects challenges traditional dual-route accounts of the effect ( e.g. , Barber & O ’ Leary , 1997 ; Tagliabue et al. , 2000 ; Zhang et al. , 1999 ; Zorzi & Umiltà , 1995 ) .
Consider , for example , the most prominent dual- route model , the dimensional overlap model of Kornblum and colleagues ( e.g. , Kornblum et al. , 1990 ; Zhang et al. , 1999 ) .
The model presumes that perceptual , structural , or conceptual overlap between a stimulus dimension and a response dimension consti- tutes both a necessary and a sufficient condition for S–R corre- spondence effects to occur .
If such “ dimensional overlap ” between a stimulus and a response set is given , the presentation of a stimulus will automatically activate its corresponding response .
Does the concept of dimensional overlap require variability of stimuli and responses on the same dimension for S–R correspon- dence effects to occur ?
We do not think so .
The dimensional overlap model—as do most dual-route models—subscribes to the hypothesis that stimulus-based response activation rests on long- term S–R associations .
Obviously , to produce correspondence effects , these long-term associations have to connect specific fea- tures of stimuli to specific features of responses , and not abstract dimensions .
Therefore , as long as stimulus and response features are salient , variability of stimulus or response features on overlap- ping dimensions does not appear to be necessary for stimulus- based response activation to occur .
Kornblum and colleagues also appear to concede to this notion in the following statement : “ When the stimulus overlaps with the response ( relevant or irrelevant S–R overlap ) , the presentation of a stimulus automatically activates its corresponding response ” ( Zhang et al. , 1999 , p. 397 ) .
In other words , feature overlap between stimuli and responses should suf- fice for creating S–R correspondence effects .
The response-discrimination account is also consistent with the results of previous studies demonstrating that processing along the indirect route can strongly modulate processing along the direct route in Simon tasks .
First , Hedge and Marsh ( 1975 ) were able to show that Simon effects reverse when relevant stimulus colors are incompatibly mapped onto colored response keys .
Second , Taglia- bue et al .
( 2000 ) demonstrated that practice with an incompatible mapping of stimulus locations to response locations can eliminate the Simon effect when the Simon task is performed immediately after the location-relevant task .
Moreover , in another experiment , the Simon effect even reversed when the location-relevant task with incompatible mapping preceded the Simon task by 1 week .
Third , Proctor and colleagues showed that the mapping in a location-relevant task strongly modulates Simon effects in 534 WÜHR , BIEBL , AND ANSORGE location-irrelevant trials when location-relevant and location- irrelevant trials are randomly intermixed .
For example , Proctor and Vu ( 2002 ) observed a normal Simon effect when the mapping in the location-relevant trials was compatible and a reversed Simon effect when the mapping in the location-relevant trials was incom- patible ( see Proctor & Vu , 2006 , for reviews ) .
It is interesting to note that even the reversal of Simon effects can be reconciled with the assumption that Simon effects arise from hard-wired S–R associations , as demonstrated in De Jong et al. ’ s ( 1994 ) dual- process model .
Nevertheless , from their review of mixing effects , Proctor and Vu ( 2006 ) concluded , “ overall , these results indicate that the Simon effect is not a result of automatic activation of the corresponding response that is hard-wired or over-learned , but that responding can be mediated by S–R associations defined for the task ” ( p. 139 ) .
The purpose of the present study was to further investigate the selectivity of S–R correspondence effects , as predicted by the response-discrimination account .
In particular , the present study addressed two questions .
The first question was whether the de- pendence of S–R correspondence effects on the usefulness of a dimension for discriminating between responses generalizes to correspondence effects for nonspatial dimensions , like numerosity .
This question was investigated in Experiments 1–3 , in which participants responded to the pitch of tones by pressing a left or a right key either once or twice .
In particular , when the tone ap- peared , participants lifted the responding finger from a central home key and moved it as quickly as possible to press either a left or a right key once or twice .
Obviously , this task requires partic- ipants to take both the lateral position and the number of key- presses into account when programming and executing their re- sponses .
Moreover , the tones randomly appeared at a left or right location , and the number of tones varied as well ( one tone vs. two tones ) , so that S–R correspondence varied with regard to horizon- tal location and with regard to numerosity in each experiment .
However , the response sets varied between experiments in such a way that either both dimensions ( Experiment 1 ) or only one dimension ( in Experiment 2 , location ; in Experiment 3 , numeros- ity ) could be used for response selection .
The predictions of the response-discrimination account were straightforward .
Correspon- dence effects for location and numerosity were expected in Ex- periment 1 .
By contrast , a correspondence effect for location but not for numerosity was predicted for Experiment 2 , whereas the opposite result was expected for Experiment 3 .
The second question investigated in this study was whether variability of response features on a dimension is not only neces- sary but also sufficient for producing S–R correspondence effects .
Morein-Zamir , Henik , and Spitzer-Davidson ( 2002 ) presented ev- idence suggesting that variability on an irrelevant stimulus dimen- sion is also necessary for stimulus–stimulus congruency effects to occur .
In their Experiment 2 , participants pressed a key to the color of a centrally presented color patch that was flanked by a colored color word .
It is interesting to note that congruency between target color and word color affected performance when word color was varied but not when word color was invariant .
Similarly , congru- ency between target color and word identity affected performance when word identity was varied but not when word identity was invariant .
From these observations , Morein-Zamir et al .
( 2002 ) concluded that “ variance of the irrelevant dimension appears to be a prerequisite for congruency effects ” ( p. 124 ) .
We investigated whether variability of stimulus features on a dimension is also necessary for producing S–R correspondence effects .
According to the response-discrimination account , variability of response features on a dimension might be necessary and sufficient for producing S–R correspondence effects .
By contrast , whether the variability of stimulus values on a dimension modulates S–R correspondence effects should depend upon how variability affects the encoding of different stimulus values on that dimension .
For example , variations in stimulus location might be necessary for producing spatial S–R correspondence effects .
As already noted , spatial attention shifts from a neutral ( usually central ) location to the peripheral stimulus location are assumed to produce the spatial stimulus code for the imperative stimulus in a typical Simon task with variable stimulus locations ( see Stoffer & Umiltà , 1997 ; but see Hommel , 1993b , and Zimba & Brito , 1995 ) .
Such attention shifts might not occur when the relevant stimuli are always pre- sented at the same location because spatial attention can remain at the stimulus location for a whole block of trials , preventing Simon effects from occurring .
By contrast , variations in stimulus number might not be necessary for producing S–R correspondence effects for numerosity .
We investigated the effects of variability on an irrelevant stimulus dimension on S–R correspondence effects in Experiments 4–6 .
In these experiments , the response sets required participants to discriminate responses on the basis of location and numerosity , and we varied only one irrelevant stimulus dimension ( e.g. , location ) while keeping the other irrelevant stimulus dimen- sion ( e.g. , numerosity ) constant .
Experiment 1 Experiment 1 investigated whether S–R correspondence effects for irrelevant stimulus location and for irrelevant stimulus numer- osity can occur simultaneously when both dimensions must be used for discriminating between responses to tone pitch , as pre- dicted by the response-discrimination account ( Ansorge & Wühr , 2004 ) .
Participants responded to the pitch of a tone by moving their right index fingers from a central ( home ) key to a left or right key , which had to be pressed once or twice as quickly as possible .
The response set ( e.g. , for a low tone , pressing the left key once vs. for a high tone , pressing the right key twice ) required participants to discriminate between the responses on the basis of both location ( left vs. right ) and numerosity ( one keypress vs. two keypresses ) .
Moreover , because the tones also varied in location and number , the response-discrimination account predicted S–R correspon- dence effects for both dimensions in Experiment 1 .
Method Participants .
Twenty volunteers ( 14 women , 6 men ) , most of them students of the Friedrich-Alexander-University , with a mean age of 22.3 years ( range , 18–29 years ) , participated for payment ( € 5 ) or course credit .
In this and the following experiments , partic- ipants were naı̈ve with respect to the purpose of the study and classified themselves as having normal ( or corrected-to-normal ) visual acuity .
Apparatus and stimuli .
Participants sat in a dimly lit room in front of a 17-in .
color monitor , with an unconstrained viewing distance of approximately 60 cm .
The auditory stimuli were pre- sented on two PC loudspeakers that were positioned 30 cm to the 535S–R CORRESPONDENCE EFFECTS left and right of the monitor , respectively .
A computer program written in ERTS language ( BeriSoft , Frankfurt am Main , Ger- many ) controlled stimulus presentation and collected responses .
All responses were keypresses with the right index finger on the number pad of a standard keyboard ( the 4 , 5 , and 6 keys ) .
The auditory stimuli were computer-generated tones that varied in pitch ( for a low pitch , 400 Hz vs. for a high pitch , 800 Hz ) , number ( 1 tone of 150-ms duration vs. 2 tones of 50-ms duration , each separated by an interstimulus interval of 50 ms ) , and location ( left vs. right ) .
The loudness of the tones was approximately 65 dB ( A ) .
Procedure .
At the beginning of the experiment , the instruc- tions appeared on the screen , and participants could read them at leisure .
Participants were instructed to respond to the pitch of a tone by pressing an appropriate sequence of keys as quickly as possible .
Participants were also told that the location and the number of the tones would vary as well , although this would be irrelevant for their task .
Instructions also informed participants about the relevant S–R mapping .
It is important to note that the response set of Experiment 1 ( pressing the left key once vs. pressing the right key twice or pressing the left key twice vs. pressing the right key once , counterbalanced across participants ) allowed participants to discriminate the responses both with regard to number and with regard to location .
The four possible mappings of tone pitch to response set were equally distributed across participants .
Each trial contained the following sequence of events .
First , a screen message instructed participants to start the next trial by pressing the home key ( the 5 key on the numerical pad ) and to keep this key pressed .
Next , one or two tones appeared in a low or high pitch in either the left or right loudspeaker .
Depending upon the S–R mapping , participants were required to perform a partic- ular sequence of keypresses to the pitch of the tone or tones .
For example , one group of participants was instructed to leave the home key ( the 5 key ) and press the left key ( the 4 key ) once to low-pitch tones , whereas they had to leave the home key and press the right key ( the 6 key ) twice to high-pitch tones .
Keypresses and response times ( RTs ) were measured from the onset of the tone for a period of 2,500 ms .
Participants could take a rest between two blocks and could start the next block at leisure .
The whole exper- iment took about 30 min .
There were 24 practice trials and 10 blocks of 24 experimental trials each .
Design .
The experiment had a 2 2 within-subjects design .
The first variable was S–R correspondence with regard to position ( position correspondence ) .
The position of the tone or tones and the relative position of the response or responses was either cor- responding ( i.e. , left–left , right–right ) or noncorresponding ( i.e. , left–right , right–left ) .
The second variable was S–R correspon- dence with regard to number ( number correspondence ) .
The num- ber of the tones and the number of responses was either corre- sponding ( i.e. , one–one , two–two ) or noncorresponding ( i.e. , one– two , two–one ) .
There were two dependent variables in Experiment 1 .
First , we measured the time interval between stimulus onset and the point in time at which one of the lateral keys was pressed for the first time ( RT ) .1 Second , we computed the percentage of response errors ( PE ) for each condition .
Note that for each correct response , there were three types of errors ( e.g. , for a correct response of pressing the left key once , incorrect responses included pressing the right key once , pressing the left key twice , and pressing the right key twice ) .
Results To eliminate outliers , we removed all trials in which RTs exceeded two standard deviations from the individual mean for each participant .
Averaged across participants , 0.3 % of trials with premature responses and 4.3 % of trials with delayed responses were excluded .
Figure 1 shows mean RTs for the four experimen- tal conditions .
The mean interresponse interval for double key- presses was 137 ms ( SD 66 ) .
RT .
A two-way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) was computed on RTs from error-free trials , with position correspondence and number correspondence as within-subjects variables .
A significant main effect of position correspondence , F ( 1 , 19 ) 12.58 , MSE 580.79 , p .01 , indicated faster responses with corresponding than with noncorresponding positions of stimuli and responses ( 829 vs. 848 ms ) .
A significant main effect of number correspon- dence , F ( 1 , 19 ) 28.36 , MSE 471.92 , p .001 , indicated faster responses with corresponding than with noncorresponding num- bers of stimuli and responses ( 825 vs. 851 ms ) .
The interaction was not significant ( F 1.4 , p .25 ) .
Fifteen participants showed a correspondence effect for position of at least 7 ms ; 18 participants showed a correspondence effect for number of at least 5 ms .
Moreover , 13 participants showed correspondence effects of at least 5 ms on both dimensions simultaneously ( see Figure 2 ) , although the two correspondence effects were not significantly correlated ( r .23 , p .35 ) .
PE .
A two-way ANOVA was also computed on PEs .
The main effect of number correspondence , F ( 1 , 19 ) 2.41 , MSE 4.67 , p .14 , was not significant .
A significant main effect of position correspondence , F ( 1 , 19 ) 5.00 , MSE 2.78 , p .05 , indicated fewer errors with corresponding than with noncorre- sponding positions of stimuli and responses ( 3.4 % vs. 4.2 % ) .
Moreover , a significant two-way interaction , F ( 1 , 19 ) 6.85 , MSE 3.98 , p .05 , suggested that the effect of location correspondence was restricted to trials with number noncorrespon- dence .
Discussion Experiment 1 showed that S–R correspondence effects can occur simultaneously for an irrelevant spatial dimension ( horizon- tal position ) and an irrelevant nonspatial dimension ( numerosity ) when participants can discriminate responses on both dimensions .
This result adds to similar observations demonstrating that Simon effects can occur for two spatial dimensions simultaneously ( e.g. , Ansorge & Wühr , 2004 ; Rubichi , Nicoletti , & Umiltà , 2005 ) and studies showing that Stroop-flanker effects can occur for stimulus color and stimulus identity at the same time ( e.g. , Morein-Zamir et 1 Actually , our latency measure consists of two phases : the time between stimulus onset and movement onset ( i.e. , finger leaves home key ; response time ) and the time between movement onset and movement offset ( i.e. , finger presses target key ; movement time ) .
We have also performed sep- arate analyses of the two latency components for each experiment .
The results were , of course , very similar to the results reported here for the compound measure .
536 WÜHR , BIEBL , AND ANSORGE al. , 2002 ) .
The following Experiments 2 and 3 tested whether the S–R correspondence effects for location or numerosity disappear when the respective dimension is no longer useful for discriminat- ing between responses .
Experiment 2 Experiment 2 tested whether an S–R correspondence effect for numerosity would disappear , whereas the S–R correspondence effect for position would persist , when participants have to select spatial responses on the basis of position only .
Therefore , in comparison with Experiment 1 , only the response set was changed .
In Experiment 2 , participants could discriminate between the re- sponses to tone pitch on the basis of position but not on the basis of numerosity ( e.g. , for the low tone , pressing the left key twice vs. for the high tone , pressing the right key twice ) .
It is important to note that , on a motor level , participants of course had to consider both the location of the target key and the number of keypresses when programming and executing their responses .
However , be- cause only relative position was useful for response discrimination in WM , the response-discrimination account predicts a correspon- dence effect for position , but not for numerosity , in Experiment 2 .
Method Participants .
Twenty new volunteers ( 15 women , 5 men ) with a mean age of 22.4 years ( range , 19–28 years ) participated for payment ( € 5 ) or course credit .
Apparatus , stimuli , and procedure .
The apparatus and stimuli from Experiment 1 were also used in Experiment 2 .
The only difference concerned the response set or sets .
The response set of Experiment 2 ( pressing the left key once vs. pressing the right key once or pressing the left key twice vs. pressing the right key twice , counterbalanced across participants ) required participants to dis- criminate the responses with regard to location but not with regard to number .
The procedure for Experiment 2 was otherwise iden- tical to that for Experiment 1 .
Design .
Experiment 2 had the same 2 ( position correspon- dence ) 2 ( number correspondence ) within-subjects design as had Experiment 1 .
Moreover , the same dependent variables as in Experiment 1 ( i.e. , RT and PE ) were investigated .
Results Averaged across participants , 0.9 % of trials with premature responses and 3.3 % of trials with delayed responses were ex- cluded .
Figure 3 shows mean RTs for the four experimental conditions .
The mean interresponse interval for double keypresses was 129 ms ( SD 48 ) .
RT .
A two-way ANOVA on RTs from error-free trials re- vealed a significant main effect of position correspondence , F ( 1 , 19 ) 56.10 , MSE 278.80 , p .001 , but no effect of number S-R location correspondence corresponding noncorresponding R es po ns e T im e ( m s ) 750 800 850 900 950 number corresponding number noncorresponding Figure 1 .
Mean response times observed in Experiment 1 as a function of spatial stimulus–response ( S–R ) correspondence and of numerosity S–R correspondence ( N 20 ) .
Error bars represent standard errors between participants .
number correspondence -100 -50 0 50 100 lo ca tio n co rr es po nd en ce -100 -50 0 50 100 Figure 2 .
For each participant , the scatter plot depicts the effect of stimulus–response ( S–R ) correspondence for location and the effect of S–R correspondence for numerosity ( N 20 ) .
S-R location correspondence corresponding noncorresponding R es po ns e T im e ( m s ) 650 700 750 800 850 number corresponding number noncorresponding Figure 3 .
Mean response times observed in Experiment 2 as a function of spatial stimulus–response ( S–R ) correspondence and of numerosity S–R correspondence ( N 20 ) .
Error bars represent standard errors between participants .
537S–R CORRESPONDENCE EFFECTS correspondence ( F 1 ) .
Responses were faster with correspond- ing than with noncorresponding positions of stimuli and responses ( 715 vs. 743 ms ) .
The interaction was not significant ( F 1 ) .
PE .
A two-way ANOVA on PEs showed no significant re- sults : position correspondence , F ( 1 , 19 ) 1.35 , MSE 2.08 , p .26 ; number correspondence , F 1 ; interaction , F 1 .
Discussion Experiment 2 demonstrated that S–R correspondence effects for position persisted , while S–R correspondence effects for numer- osity disappeared , when participants discriminated between re- sponses on the basis of position only—although response number was still important for executing the correct response .
In other words , the results of Experiment 2 demonstrated selectivity of S–R correspondence effects , as predicted by the response- discrimination account .
Moreover , the results present a first piece of evidence that dimensional selectivity of S–R correspondence effects occur not only for spatial dimensions , but also for nonspa- tial dimensions .
Experiment 3 Experiment 3 complemented Experiment 2 in looking for di- mensional selectivity of S–R correspondence with regard to posi- tion and numerosity .
In particular , Experiment 3 tested whether the S–R correspondence effect for position would disappear , while the S–R correspondence effect for numerosity would persist , when participants discriminate between responses on the basis of num- ber only .
Therefore , Experiment 3 used a different response set than that used in the previous experiments .
In Experiment 3 , participants could discriminate between the responses to tone pitch on the basis of number but not on the basis of relative position ( e.g. , for a low tone , pressing the left key once vs. for a high tone , pressing the left key twice ) .
Of course , on a motor level , partici- pants had to use both the location of the target key and the number of keypresses when programming and executing their response because participants had to move their fingers from the central home key to the left target key .
However , because only numerosity was useful for response discrimination on the WM level , the response-discrimination account predicts a correspondence effect for numerosity , but not for position , in Experiment 3 .
Method Participants .
Twenty new volunteers ( 14 women , 6 men ) with a mean age of 24 years ( range , 21–30 years ) participated for payment ( € 5 ) or course credit .
Apparatus , stimuli , and procedure .
The apparatus and stimuli from Experiment 1 were also used in Experiment 3 .
The only difference concerned the response set or sets .
The response set of Experiment 3 ( pressing the left key once vs. pressing the left key twice or pressing the right key once vs. pressing the right key twice , counterbalanced across participants ) required participants to discriminate the responses with regard to number but not with regard to position .
Otherwise , the procedure for Experiment 3 was identical to that for Experiment 1 .
Design .
Experiment 3 had the same 2 ( position correspon- dence ) 2 ( number correspondence ) within-subjects design as had the previous experiments .
Moreover , the same dependent variables as in the previous experiments ( i.e. , RT and PE ) were investigated .
Results Averaged across participants , 0.7 % of trials with premature responses , and 3.3 % of trials with delayed responses were ex- cluded .
Results from 1 participant were excluded because her/his movement times ( M 435 ms ) were much longer than those of the whole sample ( M 229 ms , SD 56 ms ) .
Therefore , the follow- ing section reports the results from 19 participants .
Figure 4 shows mean RTs for the four experimental conditions .
The mean inter- response interval for double keypresses was 125 ms ( SD 69 ) .
RT .
A two-way ANOVA on RTs from error-free trials showed the expected main effect of number correspondence , F ( 1 , 18 ) 36.91 , MSE 227.48 , p .001 .
Responses were faster with corresponding than with noncorresponding numbers of stimuli and responses ( 720 vs. 741 ms ) .
In addition , there was a marginal effect of position correspondence , F ( 1 , 18 ) 3.56 , MSE 101.92 , p .075 , indicating somewhat longer RTs with corre- sponding locations than with noncorresponding locations ( 733 vs. 728 ms ) .
The interaction was not significant ( F 1 ) .
PE .
The error pattern mirrored the RT results .
There was the expected effect of number correspondence , F ( 1 , 18 ) 6.32 , MSE 2.80 , p .05 .
Error percentage was lower with corre- sponding than with noncorresponding numbers of stimuli and responses ( 1.6 % vs. 2.6 % ) .
There was a marginal effect of position correspondence , F ( 1 , 18 ) 3.34 , MSE 2.15 , p .08 , which indicated a somewhat higher error percentage when the positions of stimuli and responses corresponded than when positions did not correspond ( 2.4 % vs. 1.8 % ) .
The interaction was not significant ( F 1 ) .
Discussion Experiment 3 complemented the results of Experiment 2 in showing that S–R correspondence effects for numerosity persisted , S-R location correspondence corresponding noncorresponding R es po ns e T im e ( m s ) 650 700 750 800 850 number corresponding number noncorresponding Figure 4 .
Mean response times observed in Experiment 3 as a function of spatial stimulus–response ( S–R ) correspondence and of numerosity S–R correspondence ( N 19 ) .
Error bars represent standard errors between participants .
538 WÜHR , BIEBL , AND ANSORGE whereas the normal S–R correspondence effect for relative posi- tion did not appear , when participants discriminated between re- sponses on the basis of number but not on the basis of relative position .
We were surprised to observe a trend for an inverted S–R correspondence effect for position both in RTs and in PEs .
This supports our notion that the uselessness of response position pre- vents normal S–R correspondence effects from occurring , although we do not have an explanation for the observed trends toward an inverted effect .
It might be interesting to note , however , that S–R correspondence for position had no significant effects when the latencies of the two response phases ( i.e. , from S onset to move- ment onset ; from movement onset to movement offset ) were analyzed separately .
In summary , the results of Experiments 2 and 3 demonstrate dimensional selectivity of S–R correspondence ef- fects for spatial and nonspatial S–R dimensions , as predicted by the response-discrimination account .
This result shows that the selectivity of S–R correspondence effects , which Ansorge and Wühr ( 2004 ) have observed for spatial dimensions , generalizes to nonspatial dimensions as well .
The subsequently reported Exper- iments 4–6 investigated the role of the variability of stimulus features on an irrelevant dimension for the selective occurrence of S–R correspondence effects .
Experiment 4 Experiments 4–6 investigated how variability of stimulus fea- tures on an irrelevant dimension ( stimulus variability ) affects S–R correspondence effects .
From the perspective of the response- discrimination account , stimulus variability should not be a nec- essary condition for S–R correspondence effects because it does not affect the usefulness of a feature dimension for response discrimination .
Whether stimulus variability affects S–R corre- spondence effects should depend upon how perceptual mecha- nisms encode different values on a dimension .
If stimulus vari- ability is necessary for encoding single values on a dimension , variability on that dimension is necessary for producing S–R correspondence effects .
If stimulus variability is not necessary for encoding single values on a dimension , an invariant stimulus feature might also produce S–R correspondence effects .
These considerations make it clear that the effects of stimulus variability do not allow distinguishing between different explanations for S–R correspondence effects because all accounts require that the re- spective stimulus feature is processed at all .
Experiment 4 investigated whether variability of stimulus num- ber is necessary for producing S–R correspondence effects on that dimension .
Tone position varied unpredictably from trial to trial , while tone number remained constant throughout the experiment .
It is important to note that the response set ( e.g. , for a low tone , pressing the left key once vs. for a high tone , pressing the right key twice ) required participants to discriminate between the responses on the basis of both location and numerosity , as in Experiment 1 .
Therefore , we expected an S–R correspondence effect for location because both stimuli and responses varied on that dimension .
The question was whether invariant stimulus number would still pro- duce an S–R correspondence effect for numerosity .
The stimulus numbers used in Experiment 4 are so small ( 1 vs. 2 ) that they do not need to be explicitly counted but can be subitized instead .
The term subitizing refers to a preverbal counting mechanism that runs more quickly and less accurately than verbal counting ( Gallistel & Gelman , 1991 ; Mandler & Shebo , 1982 ) .
The present Experiment 4 investigates whether small numbers of stimuli are subitized , although stimulus number is irrelevant for the task at hand and remains invariant across the experiment .
Method Participants .
Seventeen new volunteers ( 15 women , 2 men ) with a mean age of 22 years ( range , 18–27 years ) participated for payment ( € 5 ) or course credit .
Apparatus , stimuli , and procedure .
The apparatus and stimuli from Experiment 1 were also used in Experiment 4 .
The only difference from Experiment 1 concerned the stimulus set or sets .
The stimulus set of Experiment 4 ( one left tone vs. one right tone or two left tones vs. two right tones , counterbalanced across participants ) varied tone location but left tone number constant .
By contrast , the response set used in Experiment 4 ( pressing the left key once vs. pressing the right key twice or pressing the left key twice vs. pressing the right key once , counterbalanced across participants ) required participants to discriminate the responses with regard to number and with regard to position .
The procedure for Experiment 4 was identical to that for Experiment 1 in each other respect .
Design .
Experiment 4 had the same 2 ( position correspon- dence ) 2 ( number correspondence ) within-subjects design as had the previous experiments .
The same dependent variables as in the previous experiments ( i.e. , RT and PE ) were investigated .
Results Averaged across participants , 0.1 % of trials with premature responses and 4.4 % of trials with delayed responses were ex- cluded .
Results from 1 participant were dropped because her/his movement times ( M 513 ms ) were much longer than those of the whole sample ( M 245 ms , SD 111 ms ) .
Therefore , the following section reports the results from 16 participants .
Figure 5 shows mean RTs for the four experimental conditions .
The mean S-R location correspondence corresponding noncorresponding R es po ns e T im e ( m s ) 650 700 750 800 850 number corresponding number noncorresponding Figure 5 .
Mean response times observed in Experiment 4 as a function of spatial stimulus–response ( S–R ) correspondence and of numerosity S–R correspondence ( N 16 ) .
Error bars represent standard errors between participants .
539S–R CORRESPONDENCE EFFECTS interresponse interval for double keypresses was 128 ms ( SD 54 ) .
RT .
A two-way ANOVA on RTs from error-free trials yielded a significant main effect of position correspondence , F ( 1 , 15 ) 34.69 , MSE 430.72 , p .001 .
Responses were faster with corresponding than with noncorresponding positions of stimuli and responses ( 714 vs. 745 ms ) .
Moreover , there was also a significant main effect of number correspondence , F ( 1 , 15 ) 9.17 , MSE 1,847.51 , p .01 , reflecting faster responses with corresponding than with noncorresponding numbers of stimuli and responses ( 713 vs. 746 ms ) .
The interaction was not significant ( F 1 ) .
Fifteen participants showed a correspondence effect for position of at least 7 ms , and 12 participants showed a correspondence effect for number of at least 5 ms .
Moreover , 12 participants showed correspondence effects of at least 5 ms on both dimensions simul- taneously .
The two correspondence effects were not correlated ( r .07 ) .
In a further ANOVA , we tested whether numerosity effects in RTs differed between the group of 8 participants who always heard one tone and the group of 8 participants who always heard two tones .
There were numerically larger effects with two tones ( 694 ms vs. 740 ms , difference 46 ms ) than with one tone ( 732 ms vs. 751 ms , difference 19 ms ) , but the interaction was not signifi- cant , F ( 1 , 14 ) 1.81 , p .20 .
PE .
A two-way ANOVA on PEs showed no significant ef- fects : position correspondence , F 1.36 , p .26 ; number corre- spondence , F 1 ; interaction , F 1 .
Discussion The results of Experiment 4 showed that both a variable stim- ulus dimension ( position ) and an invariant stimulus dimension ( numerosity ) can produce S–R correspondence effects when both dimensions vary on the response side .
These results suggest that the usefulness of a particular feature dimension for response dis- crimination can represent both a necessary and a sufficient condi- tion for the emergence of S–R correspondence effects .
By contrast , variability of stimulus features on an irrelevant dimension is not a necessary condition for S–R correspondence effects , if stimulus constancy does not prevent the stimulus feature from being en- coded at all .
Thus , with regard to the mechanisms of number encoding , we showed that small numbers ( 1 vs. 2 ) are encoded ( i.e. , subitized ) even when irrelevant and invariant .
The subsequent Experiments 5 and 6 investigated how invariance of stimulus location would affect S–R correspondence effects .
Experiment 5 Experiment 5 investigated how invariance of stimulus location affects S–R correspondence effects .
From the perspective of the response-discrimination account , both invariant and variable stim- ulus features should be able to produce S–R correspondence ef- fects , as long as stimulus constancy does not prevent encoding of the stimulus feature in the first place .
Two mechanisms for the encoding of stimulus location in Simon tasks have been proposed : attention shifts and referential coding .
The more widely accepted attention-shift account assumes that the onset of the imperative stimulus triggers a shift of spatial attention to the location of the stimulus , and the direction of the attention shift produces a code of relative stimulus location ( e.g. , Nicoletti & Umiltà , 1994 ; see Stoffer & Umiltà , 1997 , for a review ) .
If stimulus location remains constant across a block of trials , attention shifts to the stimulus location may not occur , preventing stimulus location from being encoded and from producing S–R correspondence effects .
Accord- ing to the referential-coding account ( e.g. , Hommel , 1993b ) , the location of the imperative stimulus might be encoded with regard to a salient reference object ( e.g. , the response device ) , and this might still happen when the location of the stimulus remains constant .
Several previous studies have demonstrated Simon effects with stimulus location being invariant across a block of trials ( e.g. , Simon & Rudell , 1967 ; Umiltà & Nicoletti , 1985 ; Zimba & Brito , 1995 ) .
It is important to note , however , that all these studies consistently revealed smaller Simon effects with constant than with variable stimulus location .
In particular , with visual stimuli , Simon effects were usually smaller than 10 ms with constant stimulus location in comparison with the usual effect size of more than 20 ms with variable stimulus locations .
The purpose of Experiment 5 was to provide a further test of whether Simon effects could be obtained with invariant stimulus locations .
More- over , we expected a strong Simon effect of numerosity in Exper- iment 5 because stimuli and responses varied in number .
Method Participants .
Sixteen new volunteers ( 12 women , 4 men ) with a mean age of 23 years ( range , 18–33 years ) participated for payment ( € 5 ) or course credit .
Apparatus , stimuli , and procedure .
The same apparatus and stimuli from the previous experiments were used in Experiment 5 .
The only difference from Experiment 1 concerned the stimulus set or sets .
The stimulus set of Experiment 5 ( one left tone vs. two left tones or one right tone vs. two right tones , counterbalanced across participants ) varied tone number but left tone position constant .
By contrast , the response set used in Experiment 5 ( pressing the left key once vs. pressing the right key twice or pressing the left key twice vs. pressing the right key once , counterbalanced across participants ) required participants to discriminate the responses with regard to number and position .
The procedure for Experiment 5 was identical to that for Experiment 1 in each other respect .
Design .
Experiment 5 had the same 2 ( position correspon- dence ) 2 ( number correspondence ) within-subjects design as had the previous experiments .
Moreover , the same dependent variables ( i.e. , RT and PE ) were investigated .
Results Averaged across participants , 0.4 % of trials with premature responses and 4.0 % of the trials with delayed responses were excluded .
Figure 6 shows mean RTs for the four experimental conditions .
The mean interresponse interval for double keypresses was 120 ms ( SD 34 ) .
RT .
A two-way ANOVA on RTs from error-free trials re- vealed a significant main effect of number correspondence , F ( 1 , 15 ) 31.60 , MSE 155.38 , p .001 .
Responses were faster when the numbers of stimuli and responses corresponded than when they did not ( 799 vs. 817 ms ) .
By contrast , neither the main effect of position nor the interaction was significant ( both Fs 1 ) .
540 WÜHR , BIEBL , AND ANSORGE PE .
A two-way ANOVA on PEs showed only a significant main effect of number correspondence , F ( 1 , 15 ) 8.56 , MSE 2.68 , p .05 .
The error percentage was lower when the numbers of stimuli and responses corresponded than when they did not ( 1.4 % vs. 2.6 % ; all other Fs 1 ) .
Discussion In Experiment 5 , the correspondence between variable tone number and variable response number had an effect on perfor- mance , whereas the correspondence between constant tone posi- tion and variable response position did not .
On the one hand , our failure to observe a Simon effect with invariant stimulus location appears consistent with the attention-shifting account for encoding stimulus location in Simon tasks .
The reason is that participants could focus their attention on an invariant location before stimulus presentation , which should prevent attention shifts to stimulus location upon stimulus onset and thus should also prevent Simon effects .
On the other hand , however , the results of Experiment 5 seem inconsistent with some previous studies reporting reduced but still significant Simon effects with invariant stimulus location ( e.g. , Simon & Rudell , 1967 ; Umiltà & Nicoletti , 1985 ; Zimba & Brito , 1995 ) .
Therefore , Experiment 6 investigated the robustness of the results of Experiment 5 .
Experiment 6 Experiment 6 investigated the robustness of the absence of the spatial Simon effect with invariant tone location in Experiment 5 .
Toward that aim , we presented a contralateral warning tone before the imperative signal in each trial to increase the probability for spatial attention shifts to the location of the imperative signal .
The idea was that the warning tone might , at least sometimes , attract spatial attention to its location , enabling a subsequent shift of spatial attention to the contralateral location of the imperative signal , which should produce a correspondence effect for the location dimension .
The warning tone differed from the imperative signal with regard to location , frequency , and number ( three short beeps rather than one or two ) .
Method Participants .
Twenty-four new volunteers ( 18 women , 6 men ) with a mean age of 23 years ( range , 19–29 years ) participated for payment ( € 5 ) or course credit .
Apparatus , stimuli , and procedure .
The apparatus and stimuli from Experiment 5 were also used in Experiment 6 .
The only difference was that a contralateral warning stimulus preceded the imperative tone in each trial .
The warning stimulus was a sequence of three short beeps ( frequency 600 Hz ) with a total duration of 150 ms .
The interstimulus interval between the warning tone and the imperative tone was 500 ms ; the stimulus onset asynchrony was 650 ms .
The procedure for Experiment 6 was identical to that for Ex- periment 5 in each other respect .
As a consequence , the stimulus set of Experiment 6 varied tone number but left tone position constant , and the response set required participants to discriminate the responses with regard to number and position .
Design .
Experiment 6 had a 2 ( position correspondence ) 2 ( number correspondence ) within-subjects design .
Moreover , the same dependent variables as in the previous experiments ( i.e. , RT and PE ) were investigated .
Results Averaged across participants , 0.5 % of trials with premature responses and 4.0 % of trials with delayed responses were ex- cluded .
Figure 7 shows mean RTs for the four experimental conditions .
The mean interresponse interval for double keypresses was 114 ms ( SD 45 ) .
RT .
A two-way ANOVA on RTs from error-free trials yielded a significant main effect of number correspondence , F ( 1 , 23 ) 37.11 , MSE 229.56 , p .001 .
Responses were faster when the numbers of stimuli and responses corresponded than when they did S-R location correspondence corresponding noncorresponding R es po ns e T im e ( m s ) 750 800 850 900 950 number corresponding number noncorresponding Figure 6 .
Mean response times observed in Experiment 5 as a function of spatial stimulus–response ( S–R ) correspondence and of numerosity S–R correspondence ( N 16 ) .
Error bars represent standard errors between participants .
S-R location correspondence corresponding noncorresponding R es po ns e T im e ( m s ) 650 700 750 800 850 number corresponding number noncorresponding Figure 7 .
Mean response times observed in Experiment 6 as a function of spatial stimulus–response ( S–R ) correspondence and of numerosity S–R correspondence ( N 24 ) .
Error bars represent standard errors between participants .
541S–R CORRESPONDENCE EFFECTS not ( 729 vs. 748 ms ) .
By contrast , neither the main effect of position nor the interaction was significant ( both Fs 1 ) .
PE .
A two-way ANOVA on PEs showed no significant result : number correspondence , F ( 1 , 23 ) 2.19 , MSE 5.82 , p .15 ; location correspondence , F 1 ; interaction , F ( 1 , 23 ) 1.13 , p .30 .
Discussion The results of Experiment 6 demonstrate that the absence of Simon effects for location is robust when the location of the imperative stimulus remains invariant across trials .
In particular , spatial correspondence between the invariant location of the im- perative stimulus and the variable location of a response to that stimulus did not affect performance , regardless of whether a con- tralateral warning tone preceded the imperative signal on each trial ( as in Experiment 6 ) or not ( as in Experiment 5 ) .
These results are consistent with the attention-shift account of location coding in the Simon task because the opportunity to focus spatial attention on stimulus location before stimulus onset should prevent attention shifts to stimulus location upon stimulus onset and , hence , should prevent Simon effects for location ( e.g. , Stoffer & Umiltà , 1997 ) .
At first sight , the results of the present Experiments 5 and 6 appear inconsistent with some previous studies that have reported reduced but still significant Simon effects with invariant stimulus location ( e.g. , Simon & Rudell , 1967 ; Umiltà & Nicoletti , 1985 ; Zimba & Brito , 1995 ) .
The most likely explanation for the differ- ent results arises from an important methodological difference between the studies .
In particular , whereas stimulus location al- ways varied between blocks in the previous studies , stimulus location remained constant throughout Experiments 5 and 6 .
Therefore , we suggest that the need to switch the focus of spatial attention between blocks in the previous studies caused some shifts of attention from the old stimulus location to the new stimulus location at the beginning of each block , which sufficed to produce significant spatial Simon effects .
This suggestion also explains the small size of the Simon effects observed in the previous studies by assuming that Simon effects only emerged in the first trials of each block when participants had to relearn the new location of the imperative stimulus .
Consistent with this interpretation , we ob- served a location-based Simon effect of 12 ms in a replication of Experiment 5 in which stimulus location remained constant within each block but varied between blocks .
In summary , the results of Experiments 4–6 revealed that invariance of stimulus number did not prevent encoding , which enabled stimulus-number codes to interact with response-number codes .
In other words , variability of response number is both a necessary and a sufficient condition for S–R correspondence ef- fects for numerosity .
By contrast , the invariance of stimulus loca- tion prevented the encoding of stimulus location and , as a conse- quence , prevented spatial S–R correspondence effects .
In other words , locations must vary both on the stimulus and on the response side to produce an S–R correspondence effect for posi- tion ( i.e. , a Simon effect ) .
General Discussion The present study investigated the prerequisites for observing S–R correspondence effects between irrelevant stimulus attributes and relevant response attributes .
In particular , the study investi- gated to what extent variability on irrelevant stimulus dimensions and variability on relevant response dimensions are necessary to obtain S–R correspondence effects .
The response-discrimination account predicts that the variability of responses on a dimension is necessary for observing S–R correspondence effects for this di- mension because variability affords response discrimination on this dimension in WM .
By contrast , stimulus variability should not be necessary for producing S–R correspondence effects in general , but it might affect whether or not different values on a particular dimension are encoded .
That is , invariant ( and irrelevant ) stimulus values might be encoded for some stimulus dimensions but not for others .
Experiments 1–3 investigated whether variability on response dimensions is a necessary prerequisite for S–R correspondence effects with regard to horizontal position ( Simon effects ) and for S–R correspondence effects with regard to numerosity ( numerosity effects ) .
Experiment 1 demonstrated that Simon effects and nu- merosity effects can occur simultaneously when horizontal posi- tion and number varied both as irrelevant stimulus features and as relevant response features .
By contrast , Experiment 2 showed that numerosity effects disappeared when response number ( i.e. , the number of required keypresses ) was constant while irrelevant stimulus numbers still varied , whereas Simon effects persisted with variability of stimulus and response positions .
In a comple- mentary manner , Experiment 3 revealed that Simon effects disap- peared when response position was constant while irrelevant stim- ulus position varied , whereas numerosity effects persisted with variability in the number of stimuli and responses .
In summary , the results of Experiments 1–3 suggest that the variability of response features on spatial and nonspatial dimensions is a necessary con- dition for obtaining S–R correspondence effects for these dimen- sions .
Experiments 4–6 investigated whether variability of response features is also sufficient for obtaining S–R correspondence effects or whether variability of stimulus features is also necessary .
Ex- periment 4 replicated the Simon effect with variability in stimulus and response positions and , in addition , demonstrated that numer- osity effects can be obtained with constant stimulus numbers , as long as there is variability in the number of responses .
By contrast , Experiment 5 replicated the numerosity effect with variability in the number of stimuli and responses but failed to show a Simon effect with constant stimulus position .
Experiment 6 showed that the failure to obtain a Simon effect with constant stimulus location is robust because even the presentation of a contralateral warning tone before the imperative stimulus tone did not reinstate the effect .
In summary , Experiments 4–6 demonstrated that variability of response features is sufficient for obtaining number correspon- dence effects , whereas variability of stimulus position and vari- ability of response position are both necessary for observing Si- mon effects .
The first major result of the present study is that the dimensional selectivity of S–R correspondence effects does not only occur for spatial dimensions , but also generalizes to nonspatial dimensions ( i.e. , numerosity ) .
This result advances our knowledge about the type of stimulus and response representations that are involved in producing S–R correspondence effects .
In particular , the results support a core assumption of the response-discrimination account , according to which S–R correspondence effects should preferen- 542 WÜHR , BIEBL , AND ANSORGE tially arise for a dimension that can be used for discriminating between possible responses in working memory .
In the present experiments , horizontal Simon effects only occurred when the possible responses varied in horizontal position and , therefore , could be discriminated on the basis of position .
By contrast , horizontal Simon effects did not occur when horizontal response position was invariant .
Similarly , S–R correspondence effects for numerosity occurred when the possible responses varied in number and , therefore , participants were able to discriminate between possible responses on the basis of the number of keypresses .
By contrast , numerosity effects were absent when the number of keypresses was invariant .
It is important to note that in all of these conditions the absence of S–R correspondence effects can not be attributed to the fact that participants simply ignored the invariant response dimension because both position and number had to be used for programming the correct response sequence even when being invariant .
The present results challenge a widely accepted assumption of dual-route models of S–R correspondence effects , namely , that stimulus-feature codes almost inevitably activate a corresponding response code on the basis of long-term associations that circum- vent WM ( e.g. , Kornblum et al. , 1990 ; Tagliabue et al. , 2000 ; Zorzi & Umiltà , 1995 ) .
If this were the case , we should have observed S–R correspondence effects both for variable response features and for invariant response features , which was not the case .
One might argue , however , that stimulus-driven response activation on the basis of long-term associations might be re- stricted to members of the response set only ( e.g. , Shiu & Korn- blum , 1999 ) .
On this assumption , response competition in noncor- responding conditions should arise when responses vary on a dimension but not when responses remain invariant on a dimen- sion .
Even if stimuli could only activate a corresponding response that is part of the response set , however , corresponding stimuli should still produce facilitation , and a reduced S–R correspon- dence effect should still occur .
An interesting feature of our results was that the effects of the two experimental variables ( i.e. , location correspondence and number correspondence ) almost never interacted .
In particular , the two variables never interacted in their effects on RTs , but the analysis of error percentages revealed a significant interaction for Experiment 1 .
According to additive-factors method , introduced by Sternberg ( 1969 ) , the results of an ANOVA on RTs in two- factorial experiments are informative about the number ( and na- ture ) of processing stages involved in the experimental task .
In particular , according to Sternberg ( 1969 ) , the observation that two factors have additive nonzero effects suggests that the two factors affect two different stages of processing .
By contrast , the obser- vation that the effects of two factors interact suggests that they affect at least one common processing stage ( see Hommel , 1993a , Pieters , 1983 , and Sanders , 1980 , for critical discussions ) .
What do the results of the present experiments tell us about whether posi- tion effects and numerosity effects arise at the same stage or at different stages of processing ?
On the one hand , there is ample evidence suggesting that the effects of spatial S–R correspondence arise at the level of response selection ( see Lu & Proctor , 1995 , and Sanders , 1980 , for reviews ) .
Moreover , the observed interac- tion in error rates in Experiment 1 suggests that the two factors affected the same processing stage .
On the other hand , Sternberg also conceded the existence of exceptions to his rules .
He noted , for example , that factors might happen to affect the same stage additively .
This might occur , for example , when different pro- cesses select the two features of a two-dimensional response on the same stage of processing .
In this case , stimulus location might affect selection of response location , and stimulus number might affect selection of response number , independently .
The second major result of the present study was that variability of ( irrelevant ) stimulus number is not necessary for producing numerosity effects .
Both constant ( Experiment 4 ) and variable ( Experiment 5 ) stimulus numbers produced S–R correspondence effects as long as the responses varied in number .
This result has three implications .
First , it demonstrates that variability of re- sponse number is both necessary and sufficient for producing S–R correspondence effects , supporting the response-discrimination ac- count .
Second , the finding constrains the claim made by Morein- Zamir et al .
( 2002 ) , according to which “ variance of the irrelevant dimension appears to be a prerequisite for congruency effects ” ( p. 124 ) .
Obviously , their claim does not apply to S–R correspondence effects for numerosity .
It may be that variability on an irrelevant stimulus dimension is necessary for affecting the processing of a relevant stimulus dimension , that is , for producing stimulus– stimulus congruency effects .
It is , however , also possible that there is no general rule as to whether stimulus variability is necessary for producing congruency or correspondence effects but that this depends upon whether dimensional variability affects the percep- tual mechanisms for encoding the particular dimension .
The third implication of the observed independence of numerosity effects from stimulus variability is that small numbers are encoded when being both irrelevant and invariant .
Small numbers , especially when being irrelevant for the task at hand , are presumably not explicitly counted but subitized ( Gallistel & Gelman , 1991 ; Man- dler & Shebo , 1982 ) .
Subitizing refers to a preverbal counting mechanism that runs quickly but inaccurately and therefore be- comes ineffective for numbers larger than 4 .
The present results suggest that neither the relevance nor the variability of stimulus number is a necessary condition for subitizing to occur .
Always presenting one tone and always presenting two tones produced numerosity effects , although the effect was numerically larger for two tones , suggesting that numerosity is more salient for two tones than for a single tone .
The third major result of the present study was that variability of ( irrelevant ) stimulus location is necessary for producing Simon effects .
In particular , when the imperative stimulus was always presented at the same location to each participant in Experiment 5 , Simon effects completely disappeared .
Moreover , Simon effects even remained absent in Experiment 6 when a contralateral warn- ing tone preceded the imperative tone on each trial .
These results have important implications for our understanding of the mecha- nisms that encode stimulus location in the Simon task .
In partic- ular , the results are consistent with the so-called attention-shift account of spatial-code formation .
On this account , a shift of spatial attention to the locus of the imperative stimulus produces a spatial stimulus code ( see Stoffer & Umiltà , 1997 , for a review ) .
In the typical Simon task , when imperative stimuli appear unpredict- ably to the left or right of screen center , participants will most likely focus spatial attention onto screen center before stimulus onset .
In fact , participants are usually urged to attend to screen center before stimulus presentation .
The onset of the imperative stimulus will trigger a shift of spatial attention to its location , and 543S–R CORRESPONDENCE EFFECTS the direction of that attention shift is assumed to produce a spatial stimulus code .
When the imperative stimulus is always presented at the same location , as was the case in our Experiments 5 and 6 , participants can focus attention on the stimulus location in ad- vance , and the onset of the imperative stimulus can no longer trigger an attention shift to its location .
As a result , Simon effects will not be observed with invariant stimulus locations .
Participants even appeared to suppress an attention shift to the contralateral location of the warning tone in Experiment 6 .
This finding is consistent with previous observations also demonstrating that sa- lient stimulus events fail to capture attention when an observer directs attention to a spatial location in advance of stimulus pre- sentation ( e.g. , Yantis & Jonides , 1990 ) .
The results of Experiments 5 and 6 are inconsistent with the referential-coding account , which has been proposed as an alter- native to the attention-shift account ( e.g. , Hommel , 1993b ) .
Ac- cording to this account , the location of the imperative stimulus in the Simon task is encoded with regard to a reference object ( e.g. , the fixation point ) , independent from shifts of spatial attention .
This account clearly fails to explain the absence of Simon effects in Experiment 6 , when a contralateral warning tone preceded each stimulus presentation , because the warning tone provided a salient reference for encoding the location of the imperative tone .
An interesting feature of the present results is that Simon effects were completely absent with invariant stimulus location in Exper- iments 5 and 6 , whereas previous studies still obtained reduced but still significant Simon effects with invariant stimulus locations ( e.g. , Simon & Rudell , 1967 ; Umiltà & Nicoletti , 1985 ; Zimba & Brito , 1995 ) .
Both visual stimuli ( e.g. , Zimba & Brito , 1995 ) and auditory stimuli ( e.g. , Simon & Rudell , 1967 ) were used in these previous studies .
An important methodological difference is that the location of the imperative stimulus was varied between blocks in the former studies , whereas the location of the imperative stimulus remained the same throughout our Experiments 5 and 6 .
Therefore , we assume that the need to readjust the focus of attention between blocks involved some shifts of attention from the old to the new location in the previous studies , which were sufficient to produce small Simon effects .
By contrast , participants did not have to readjust the focus of attention in our experiment , which appeared to prevent Simon effects from occurring .
In summary , the results of the present study suggest that the variability of response features is more important for S–R corre- spondence than is the variability of irrelevant stimulus features .
Lack of variability prevents the encoding of stimulus features for some dimensions ( e.g. , horizontal position ) but not for others ( e.g. , numerosity ) , which are then represented in WM .
The variability of response features on a dimension enables participants to represent and discriminate between responses on that dimension in WM , which is a necessary condition for stimulus codes to activate corresponding response codes in WM .
References Ansorge , U. , & Wühr , P. ( 2004 ) .
A response-discrimination account of the Simon effect .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 30 , 365–377 .
Barber , P. J. , & O ’ Leary , M. J .
( 1997 ) .
The relevance of salience : Towards an activational account of irrelevant stimulus-response compatibility effects .
In B. Hommel & W. Prinz ( Eds .
) , Theoretical issues in stimulus- response compatibility ( pp .
135–172 ) .
Amsterdam : Elsevier .
Coles , M. ( 1989 ) .
Modern mind-brain reading : Psychophysiology , physi- ology , and cognition .
Psychophysiology , 26 , 251–269 .
De Jong , R. , Liang , C. C. , & Lauber , E. ( 1994 ) .
Conditional and uncon- ditional automaticity : A dual-process model of effects of spatial stimulus–response correspondence .
Journal of Experimental Psychol- ogy : Human Perception and Performance , 20 , 731–750 .
Gallistel , C. R. , & Gelman , R. ( 1991 ) .
Subitizing : The preverbal counting process .
In W. Kessen , A. Ortony , & F. I. M. Craik ( Eds .
) , Memories , thoughts , and emotions : Essays in honor of George Mandler ( pp .
65– 81 ) .
Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum .
Gevers , W. , Lammertyn , J. , Notebaert , W. , Verguts , T. , & Fias , W. ( 2006 ) .
Automatic response activation of implicit spatial information : Evidence from the SNARC effect .
Acta Psychologica , 122 , 221–233 .
Hedge , A. , & Marsh , N. W. ( 1975 ) .
The effect of irrelevant spatial correspondence on two-choice response-time .
Acta Psychologica , 39 , 427–439 .
Hommel , B .
( 1993a ) .
The relationship between stimulus processing and response selection in the Simon task : Evidence for a temporal overlap .
Psychological Research , 55 , 280–290 .
Hommel , B .
( 1993b ) .
The role of attention for the Simon effect .
Psycho- logical Research , 55 , 208–222 .
Hommel , B. , Müsseler , J. , Aschersleben , G. , & Prinz , W. ( 2001 ) .
The Theory of Event Coding ( TEC ) : A framework for perception and action planning .
Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 24 , 849–937 .
Kornblum , S. , Hasbroucq , T. , & Osman , A .
( 1990 ) .
Dimensional overlap : Cognitive basis for stimulus–response compatibility : A model and tax- onomy .
Psychological Review , 97 , 253–270 .
Kunde , W. , & Stöcker , C. ( 2002 ) .
A Simon effect for stimulus-response duration .
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Ex- perimental Psychology , 55 ( A ) , 581–592 .
Lu , C. H. , & Proctor , R. W. ( 1995 ) .
The influence of irrelevant location information on performance : A review of the Simon and spatial Stroop effects .
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 2 , 174–207 .
Mandler , G. , & Shebo , B. J .
( 1982 ) .
Subitizing : An analysis of its com- ponent processes .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 111 , 1–22 .
Miller , J .
( 2006 ) .
Simon congruency effects based on stimulus and re- sponse numerosity .
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 59 , 387–396 .
Morein-Zamir , S. , Henik , A. , & Spitzer-Davidson , I .
( 2002 ) .
The impor- tance of irrelevant dimension variability in the Stroop flanker task .
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 9 , 119–125 .
Nicoletti , R. , & Umiltà , C. ( 1994 ) .
Attention shifts produce spatial stimulus codes .
Psychological Research , 56 , 144–150 .
Pieters , J. P. M. ( 1983 ) .
Sternberg ’ s additive factor method and underlying psychological processes : Some theoretical considerations .
Psychological Bulletin , 93 , 411–426 .
Proctor , R. W. , & Vu , K.-P. L. ( 2002 ) .
Mixing location-irrelevant and location-relevant trials : Influence of stimulus mode on spatial compati- bility effects .
Memory & Cognition , 30 , 281–293 .
Proctor , R. W. , & Vu , K.-P. L. ( 2006 ) .
Stimulus-response compatibility principles : Data , theory , and practice .
Boca-Raton , FL : Taylor & Fran- cis .
Rubichi , S. , Nicoletti , R. , & Umiltà , C. ( 2005 ) .
Right-left prevalence with task-irrelevant spatial codes .
Psychological Research , 69 , 167–178 .
Sanders , A. F. ( 1980 ) .
Stage analysis of reaction processes .
In G. E. Stelmach & J. Requin ( Eds .
) , Tutorials in motor behavior ( pp .
331–354 ) .
Amsterdam : North-Holland .
Shiu , L.-P. , & Kornblum , S. ( 1999 ) .
Stimulus-response compatibility ef- fects in go-no-go tasks : A dimensional overlap account .
Perception & Psychophysics , 61 , 1613–1623 .
Simon , J. R. , & Rudell , A. P. ( 1967 ) .
Auditory S–R compatibility : The effect of an irrelevant cue on information processing .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 51 , 300–304 .
544 WÜHR , BIEBL , AND ANSORGE Sternberg , S. ( 1969 ) .
The discovery of processing stages : Extensions of Donders ’ method .
Acta Psychologica , 30 , 276–315 .
Stoffer , T. H. , & Umiltà , C. ( 1997 ) .
Spatial stimulus coding and the focus of attention in S-R compatibility and the Simon effect .
In B. Hommel & W. Prinz ( Eds .
) , Theoretical issues in stimulus-response compatibility ( pp .
181–208 ) .
Amsterdam : Elsevier .
Tagliabue , M. , Zorzi , M. , Umiltà , C. , & Bassignani , F. ( 2000 ) .
The role of long-term-memory and short-term-memory links in the Simon effect .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception & Perfor- mance , 26 , 648–670 .
Umiltà , C. , & Nicoletti , R. ( 1985 ) .
Attention and coding effects in S-R compatibility due to irrelevant spatial cues .
In M. I. Posner & O. S. M. Marin ( Eds .
) , Attention and performance XI ( pp .
457–470 ) .
Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum .
Valle-Inclan , F. ( 1996 ) .
The locus of interference in the Simon effect : An ERP study .
Biological Psychology , 43 , 147–162 .
Valle-Inclan , F. , & Redondo , M. ( 1998 ) .
On the automaticity of ipsilateral response activation in the Simon effect .
Psychophysiology , 35 , 366–371 .
Wühr , P. , & Ansorge , U .
( 2007 ) .
A Simon effect in memory retrieval : Evidence for the response-discrimination account .
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 14 , 984–988 .
Yantis , S. , & Jonides , J .
( 1990 ) .
Abrupt visual onsets and selective atten- tion : Voluntary versus automatic allocation .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 16 , 601–621 .
Zhang , H. , Zhang , J. , & Kornblum , S. ( 1999 ) .
A parallel distributed processing model of stimulus–stimulus and stimulus–response compat- ibility .
Cognitive Psychology , 38 , 386–432 .
Zimba , L. D. , & Brito , C. F. ( 1995 ) .
Attention precuing and Simon effects : A test of the attention-coding account of the Simon effect .
Psychological Research , 58 , 102–118 .
Zorzi , M. , & Umiltà , C. ( 1995 ) .
A computational model of the Simon effect .
Psychological Research , 58 , 193–205 .
Received January 31 , 2007 Revision received August 14 , 2007 Accepted November 27 , 2007 545S–R CORRESPONDENCE EFFECTS
