alter2008.pdf
aS6XkqY5C59LEfkFoBJbt9Ht71TW-alter2008.pdf.plain.html

Research Article Effects of Fluency on Psychological Distance and Mental Construal ( or Why New York Is a Large City , but New York Is a Civilized Jungle ) Adam L. Alter and Daniel M. Oppenheimer Princeton University ABSTRACT—People construe the world along a continuum from concretely ( focusing on specific , local details ) to ab- stractly ( focusing on global essences ) .
We show that people are more likely to interpret the world abstractly when they experience cognitive disfluency , or difficulty processing stimuli in the environment , than when they experience cognitive fluency .
We observed this effect using three in- stantiations of fluency : visual perceptual fluency ( Study 1b ) , conceptual priming fluency ( Study 2b ) , and linguistic fluency ( Study 3 ) .
Adopting the framework of construal theory , we suggest that one mechanism for this effect is perceivers ’ tendency to interpret disfluently processed stimuli as farther from their current position than fluently processed stimuli ( Studies 1a and 2a ) .
Shakespeare ’ sHamlet is a play of 29,551 words about a fictitious Prince of Denmark .
It is also a tragic tale of revenge and exis- tential angst .
Although both descriptions are accurate , they constitute fundamentally different representations of the play .
Distinct cognitive and behavioral consequences might arise depending on whether a person construes the play in the con- crete terms of the first description or the more abstract terms of the second description .
Numerous factors appear to determine whether people rep- resent a stimulus concretely or abstractly .
One such factor is the perceiver ’ s experienced distance from the stimulus .
According to construal theory ( Liberman , Trope , & Stephan , 2007 ; Trope & Liberman , 2003 ) , the nearer people are to a stimulus , the more likely they are to focus on its concrete , specific details .
As they move farther away , they increasingly focus on its abstract , global properties ( Fujita , Henderson , Eng , Trope , & Liberman , 2006 ; Henderson , Fujita , Trope , & Liberman , 2006 ) .
Thus , for exam- ple , people are more likely to define eating as ‘ ‘ chewing and swallowing ’ ’ from nearby and ‘ ‘ getting nutrition ’ ’ from afar .
To test the relationship between distance and construal , re- searchers have generally manipulated physical distance by telling participants to imagine that the stimulus event occurred locally or thousands of miles away .
In one study , participants at New York University ( NYU ) watched a videotaped conversation between two students , ostensibly filmed either at NYU ’ s Man- hattan campus or in Florence , Italy , at NYU ’ s study-abroad campus ( Fujita et al. , 2006 , Study 2 ) .
Results were consistent with construal theory , as participants tended to describe the conversation using more abstract language when they believed the conversation was taking place in Florence .
It is worth noting that physical distance is only one instan- tiation of psychological distance , which generally promotes abstract construal .
Psychological distance reflects how far a stim- ulus feels from the self in an abstract psychological space .
More distant stimuli promote more abstract construal regardless of whether their distance is defined physically ( Fujita et al. , 2006 ) , temporally ( Liberman & Trope , 1998 ) , socially ( Small & Si- monsohn , 2006 ) , or probabilistically ( Todorov , Goren , & Trope , 2007 ; Wakslak , Trope , Liberman , & Alony , 2006 ) .
Address correspondence to Adam Alter , Psychology Department , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , e-mail : aalter @ princeton .
edu .
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE Volume 19—Number 2 161Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from There is good reason to believe that people make such dis- tance calculations spontaneously , even in the absence of explicit instruction ( Bar-Anan , Liberman , & Trope , 2006 ) .
Environ- mental cues to physical distance interact with proprioceptive feedback to prevent the perceiver from colliding with objects nearby ( e.g. , Bryant & Tversky , 1999 ) .
However , these cognitive processes may have metacognitive analogues .
In this article , we suggest that a stimulus feels psychologically close to the extent that it feels easy to process .
There are several reasons why subjective ease might influence distance judgments .
The first arises from the large literature on processing fluency—the metacognitive experience of ease or difficulty associated with a cognitive process ( for a review , see Alter & Oppenheimer , 2007 ) .
Researchers have shown that processing fluency affects a broad array of judgments , including estimates of truth ( Reber & Schwarz , 1999 ) , confidence ( Castel , McCabe , & Roediger , 2007 ) , liking ( Winkielman & Cacioppo , 2001 ) , and frequency ( Kahneman & Tversky , 1979 ) .
A second reason why subjective ease might influence distance judgments is that fluency is an ecologically valid distance cue .
Distant objects are difficult to see , and are thus perceptually disfluent .
Also , people are more likely to encounter events that are closer in space or time ( as local papers report local news , and people more frequently discuss temporally near events than events in the distant future ) .
Such repeated exposure leads to increased conceptual fluency ( Reder , 1987 ) .
The repeated pairing of fluency and closeness , on the one hand , and disfluency and distance , on the other hand , might lead people to form a bidirectional association between proximity and fluency over time ( see Oppenheimer & Frank , in press ; Unkelbach , 2006 ) .
Given the association between distance and cognitive acuity , and the fact that fluency affects many types of judgments , people might infer that disfluently processed stimuli are farther away .
Thus , our first hypothesis was that participants would perceive disfluently processed stimuli as farther away than more fluently processed stimuli .
Our second hypothesis adopted the logic of construal theory and followed from the first hypothesis : If greater disfluency implies greater distance from the target , then par- ticipants should construe disfluently processed targets in the environment more abstractly than fluently processed targets .
In this article , we present five studies that examined the link be- tween fluency and distance ( Studies 1a and 2a ) and the link between fluency andmental construal ( Studies 1b , 2b , and 3 ) .
To test the generality of the effects , we used three instantiations of fluency : visual perceptual fluency ( e.g. , Reber & Schwarz , 1999 ; Studies 1a and 1b ) , conceptual priming fluency ( e.g. , Reder , 1987 ; Studies 2a and 2b ) , and linguistic fluency ( e.g. , Alter & Oppenheimer , 2006 ; Study 3 ) .
STUDIES 1A AND 1B We began by examining the effects of visual perceptual fluency on distance judgments ( Study 1a ) and psychological construal ( Study 1b ) .
In Study 1a , participants estimated the distance from their current location in Princeton , New Jersey , to various other U.S. cities .
One version of the questionnaire was printed in an easy-to- read font ( fluency condition ) , and the other was printed in a difficult- to-read font ( disfluency condition ) .
We expected that participants who experienced disfluency in reading the questionnaire would estimate that the cities were farther away than would participants who experienced fluency .
Noting that people construe more distant stimuli more abstractly , we expected participants in Study 1b to describe a city more abstractly when the study materials were printed in a difficult-to-read font ( disfluency ) than when they were printed in an easy-to-read font ( fluency ) .
Study 1a Method Forty volunteers at a train station in West Windsor , New Jersey , estimated their distance in miles from 24 U.S. cities .
The diverse sample of participants consisted chiefly of male , Caucasian pro- fessionals whowerewaiting for amorning rush-hour train bound for New York City .
As many researchers have done ( e.g. , Alter , Op- penheimer , Epley , & Eyre , 2007 ; Oppenheimer , 2006 ) , we ma- nipulated fluency by varying the legibility of the font in which the questionnaire was written .
Half the participants were assigned to the disfluency condition and received a questionnaire printed in a font that was relatively difficult to read ( 12-point , italicized Haet- tenschweiler font : sample ) ; the other half were assigned to the fluency condition and received a questionnaire printed in an easy- to-read font ( 12-point Times New Roman font : sample ) .
For each city , the questionnaire asked : ‘ ‘ How far are you from [ city name ] ? ’ ’ To reduce the variance across participants ’ estimates , we began the questionnaire with a sentence stating that the greatest distance between Princeton and any mainland U.S. city is approximately 2,500 miles .
Results As expected , participants who experienced disfluency estimated that the cities were farther away ( M 5 1,331.17 miles , SD 5 641.86 ) than did participants who experienced fluency ( M 5 1,251.43 miles , SD5 586.58 ) , t ( 23 ) 5 3.06 , p < .01 , prep5 .97 , Zp 2 5 .29 .
These results suggest that people use visual fluency as a proxy for distance estimates .
Study 1b Construal theory suggests that people construe distant objects more abstractly than they construe near objects .
Having shown that cities seemed farther away when participants received the difficult-to- read questionnaire , we sought to show that participants would also describe cities more abstractly when they received a difficult-to- read , rather than an easy-to-read , questionnaire .
162 Volume 19—Number 2 Fluency and Construal at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from Method One hundred ninety-six volunteers from various public locations around Princeton University were asked to ‘ ‘ describe New York City using one or two sentences. ’ ’ Although participants did not provide demographic information , the samples consisted of students and working adults of mixed gender , age , and ethnicity .
Half the participants were assigned to the fluency condition and received a questionnaire printed in an easy-to-read font ( 12- point Times New Roman font : sample ) , whereas the other half were assigned to the disfluency condition and received an oth- erwise identical questionnaire printed in a difficult-to-read font ( 10-point , 25 % gray , italicized Arial font : sample ) .
Two raters who were blind to the purposes of the study coded each description .
As many of the descriptions combined both abstract and concrete elements , each description was coded as entirely abstract ( given a value of 0 ; e.g. , ‘ ‘ New York ’ s lights , shimmering in the foggy sky , remind me of outer space ’ ’ ) , en- tirely concrete ( 1 ; e.g. , ‘ ‘ New York City is a large city with five boroughs and about 18 million people ’ ’ ) , or a combination of abstract and concrete ( .5 ; e.g. , ‘ ‘ New York City is diverse , cos- mopolitan , and vibrant ’ ’ ) .
The coders were told that concrete statements refer to specific , tangible objects .
For exam- ple , you might describe the act of driving as sitting in a car , pushing the accelerator , andmoving the steering wheel to point the wheels in the direction you want to go .
This is a concrete de- scription .
An abstract description of driving a car might suggest that driving is the act of getting from point A to point B .
It is ab- stract because it describes the higher order concept rather than the mechanical specificities of driving .
The coders rated 80.1 % of the statements consistently , and a third blind coder resolved the inconsistencies .
An experimenter ( blind to the condition of the participants ) resolved the coding for a few descriptions that troubled the three coders.1 Results Because the codes were not normally distributed , we conducted a nonparametric Mann-WhitneyU test on the data .
As expected , participants in the disfluency condition provided more abstract descriptions ( M 5 .26 , SD 5 .37 ) than did participants in the fluency condition ( M5 .16 , SD5 .31 ) , U5 4,127.00 , Z5 2.06 , p < .05 , prep 5 .93 , Zp 2 5 .02.2 One potential alternative explanation for these findings is that disfluency fatigued participants , leading them to compose shorter descriptions .
Shorter descriptions may contain less con- crete detail , giving the impression of abstractness .
However , the length of the descriptions in the disfluency condition ( M5 9.66 words , SD5 3.57 ) did not differ significantly from the length of the descriptions in the fluency condition ( M 5 10.39 , SD 5 6.48 ) , t ( 194 ) < 1 ; this result suggests that the effects were not moderated by description length .
A second alternative explanation is that disfluency led to negative mood states and that negative mood , rather than dis- fluency , promoted abstract construal .
To address this concern , we asked two blind coders ( a5 .87 ) to rate the descriptions on an affective dimension from 1 ( very negative ) to 7 ( very positive ) .
The descriptions were equally positive in the two conditions ( Mfluency 5 4.49 , SD5 1.36 ; Mdisfluency 5 4.48 , SD5 1.29 ) , t < 1 ; this result suggests that the effects of fluency on construal were not merely an artifact of the effects of fluency on mood .
Discussion In sum , the results of Studies 1a and 1b suggest that greater disfluency implies greater distance from a target and leads par- ticipants to perceive the world more abstractly .
Next , we sought converging evidence by attempting to replicate this effect using a different instantiation of fluency : conceptual priming fluency .
STUDIES 2A AND 2B Manipulations of conceptual priming fluency rest on the as- sumption that previously activated semantic concepts are subse- quently easier to process and retrieve from memory ( Reder , 1987 ; Whittlesea , 1993 ) .
Researchers have shown , for example , that people classify nurse as a real word more quickly when they are primedwith theworddoctor at anearlier stage in a lexical-decision task than when they are primed with an unrelated word ( e.g. , Collins & Loftus , 1975 ) .
Across multiple domains , conceptual priming yields effects similar to those of other fluency manipula- tions ( Alter & Oppenheimer , 2007 ) .
Accordingly , in Studies 2a and 2b , we sought to show that people judge a city as closer ( Study 2a ) , and construe it more concretely ( Study 2b ) , when they have been primed with the city ’ s name in an earlier phase of the study .
Study 2a In Study 2a , participants completed two ostensibly unrelated tasks , the first of which primed certain cities , and the second of which asked them to estimate the distance of both primed and novel cities .
We expected participants to judge the novel ( and therefore less fluently processed ) cities as more distant than the primed cities .
Method Thirty-two Princeton University undergraduates volunteered to complete this study during the lunch hour at the student center on campus .
The majority of participants were freshmen and sophomores , of mixed gender and ethnicity .
Most were ap- proached while dining alone .
During the first stage of the experiment , participants read a brief article describing six baseball stadiums .
The author of the 1The results did not differ when we excluded these statements from the anal- yses .
2An independent-samples t test , the parametric analogue of the Mann- Whitney U test , also yielded significant results , t ( 194 ) 5 2.04 , p < .05 , prep 5 .92 , Zp 2 5 .02 .
Volume 19—Number 2 163 Adam L. Alter and Daniel M. Oppenheimer at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from article rated each stadium on three dimensions ( comfort , stan- dard of hot dogs , and field quality ) , and participants were asked to determine which stadium players and fans liked best .
For half the participants , the six stadiums were in Atlanta , Detroit , Milwaukee , St. Louis , San Francisco , and Cleveland .
For the other half of the participants , the six stadiums were in Cincin- nati , Houston , Pittsburgh , Seattle , Kansas City , and San Diego .
After rating the stadiums , participants received an ostensibly unrelated second questionnaire .
This questionnaire , which was similar to the questionnaire in Study 1a , asked participants to estimate the distance from their position in Princeton to 18 U.S. cities .
Half the participants were primed with 6 of these cities , the other half were primed with a different set of 6 of these cities , and the remaining 6 cities were novel to all participants .
Thus , each participant was given the names of 6 primed and 12 novel cities .
The 6 cities that were novel to all participants were excluded from all analyses and served only as fillers , included to increase the number of unprimed cities relative to primed cities .
We included more novel than primed stimuli to minimize the possibility that participants would focus on the fact that they had previously read about the primed cities , which might have prompted them to discount fluency as a distance cue ( Oppenheimer , 2004 ) .
We ex- pected each group of participants to rate the 6 cities with which they were primed as closer than the 6 cities with which the other group was primed .
Thus , for each participant , we calculated the mean estimated distance to the 6 primed cities and the mean es- timated distance to the 6 unprimed cities ( i.e. , the cities that were primed for members of the other group ) .
As in Study 1a , we sought to reduce the variance across participants ’ estimates by stating that the longest distance between Princeton and any mainland U.S. city is approximately 2,500 miles .
Results As expected , participants estimated that the primed cities were nearer ( M 5 1,273.02 miles , SD 5 230.42 ) than the unprimed cities ( M5 1,416.54miles , SD5 284.03 ) , t ( 31 ) 5 2.32 , p < .05 , prep 5 .93 , Zp 2 5 .13 .
These results replicate those of Study 1a : Cities whose names are processed fluently seem nearer than those whose names are processed disfluently .
Study 2b Having used conceptual priming to show that people judge fluently processed stimuli to be physically closer than disflu- ently processed stimuli , we sought to show that conceptual disfluency also promotes abstract construal .
Method Two hundred thirty-six Princeton University undergraduates ( 153 females , 83 males ; mean age 5 20.69 years , SD 5 2.22 years ) completed this study as part of a larger packet of unre- lated questionnaires and received $ 12 in compensation .
Fifty- six percent of participants were White , 18 % were Asian , 10 % were Black , 7 % belonged to two or more racial groups , and the remaining 9 % identified with one of several other racial groups .
The priming task was similar to the task used in Study 2a .
Participants again selected which of six baseball stadiums fans and players liked most .
In the fluency condition , one of the stadiums was Dodger Stadium , home to the Los Angeles Dodg- ers baseball team .
In the disfluency condition , this stadium was replaced by Comerica Park , home to the Detroit Tigers .
A subsequent ostensibly unrelated questionnaire asked par- ticipants to rank eight statements according to how well they de- scribed the city of Los Angeles .
Four of the statements were concrete descriptions ( e.g. , ‘ ‘ a dry , temperate city ’ ’ ) , whereas the other four were abstract descriptions ( e.g. , ‘ ‘ a tangle of freeways ’ ’ ) .
For a manipulation check , we asked a separate sample of 11 participants to rate the concreteness-abstractness of these eight statements along a 5-point continuum ( from 1 , strongly concrete , to 5 , strongly abstract ) .
We provided these participants with the brief description of concreteness and abstractness that the coders used in Study 1b .
As expected , the participants rated the concrete statements as more concrete ( M 5 2.80 , SD 5 0.74 ) than the abstract statements ( M5 4.03 , SD5 0.85 ) , t ( 9 ) 5 2.81 , p < .05 , prep 5 .95 , Zp 2 5 .47 .
Results Participants ranked each of the eight statements from 1 ( best description of Los Angeles ) to 8 ( poorest description of Los Ange- les ) .
We classified participants as concrete-preferring if they assigned superior rankings to the concrete descriptions , and as abstract-preferring if they assigned superior rankings to the abstract descriptions .
As expected , the percentage of concrete- preferring participants was higher when Los Angeles had been primed earlier in the study ( 53 % ) than when Los Angeles had not been primed ( 41 % ) , w2 ( 1 , N5 236 ) 5 3.83 , p5 .05 , prep 5 .92 , f5 .13 .
These results replicate and extend those of Study 1b , in which participants construed New York City more con- cretely when the request to describe New York was processed fluently ( i.e. , written in an easy-to-read font ) rather than dis- fluently ( i.e. , written in a difficult-to-read font ) .
STUDY 3 The previous studies suggest that stimuli that are processed disfluently feel more distant than those that are processed flu- ently , and consequently are judged as physically farther away and are construed more abstractly .
These studies show that fluency influences construal in a laboratory experiment , but in Study 3 , we examined the relation between fluency and con- strual in a naturalistic environment .
Additionally , we sought converging evidence by testing a third instantiation of fluency .
Specifically , we looked at archival data to examine how the pronounceability , or linguistic fluency , of an obscure word in- fluences how people define that word .
We collected the words and definitions from aWeb community of Balderdash players .
In 164 Volume 19—Number 2 Fluency and Construal at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from the game of Balderdash , each player attempts to generate a plausible definition for an obscure English word without having first seen its true definition .
The player-generated definitions and the real definition are posted on-line with no indication of which definition is real , and the players try to identify the real definition .
A player earns a point when other players mistake his or her fabricated definition for the word ’ s real definition.We used the natural variation in the pronounceability of English words as a proxy for fluency ( see Alter & Oppenheimer , 2006 ) .
We ex- pected people to create more abstract definitions for words that were more difficult to pronounce , and more concrete definitions for words that were easier to pronounce .
Method We collected all definitions from an on-line Balderdash com- munity ( 535 definitions of 95 words ) that ran from 1997 until 2004 and attracted 33 regular players .
Players had 2 days to contribute a definition for each round of play , and then the Web master posted the real and fabricated definitions and asked players to identify the real definition .
To obtain ratings of the 95 words ’ complexity , we divided them into three subsets of approximately 32 words each .
While completing a larger packet of questionnaires in exchange for $ 12 , each of 140 Princeton University undergraduates rated how easily he or she could pronounce each word from one of these subsets ( from 1 , very easy to pronounce , to 10 , very difficult to pronounce ) .
These ratings served as a proxy for linguistic fluency ( see Alter & Oppenheimer , 2006 ) .
Two raters blind to the purposes of the study coded each definition .
As many of the descriptions combined both abstract and concrete elements , each description was coded as entirely abstract ( given a value of 0 ) , entirely concrete ( 1 ) , or a combi- nation of abstract and concrete ( .5 ) .
Results As expected , the Balderdash contestants created more abstract definitions for the more difficult-to-pronounce words , b5.14 , t ( 533 ) 5 3.18 , p 5 .002 , prep 5 .99 ( see Table 1 for repre- sentative examples ) .3 Of the 33 players , 25 ( 76 % ) created more abstract definitions for less pronounceable words , a significantly greater proportion than might be expected by chance , w2 ( 1 , N5 33 ) 5 8.06 , p 5 .003 , prep 5 .98 .
Furthermore , the mean correlation between the pronounceability of the words and the abstractness of players ’ definitions differed reliably from zero ( Mr5.16 , SDr5 .32 ) , t ( 32 ) 52.81 , p < .01 , prep5 .97 , Zp 2 5 .20.4 Thus , both definition- and player-level analyses revealed that players generated more abstract definitions for more difficult-to-pronounce words .
It is important to note that we also found that participants did not provide shorter definitions for more disfluently processed words , r ( 533 ) 5 .003 .
Thus , it is not the case that linguistic disfluency only appeared to induce abstract construal because participants created shorter ( and less concretely detailed ) definitions for more disfluently processed words .
GENERAL DISCUSSION Across five studies , we have shown that disfluently processed stimuli feel more psychologically distant than fluently processed stimuli , and consequently are judged as farther away and per- ceived more abstractly .
This effect emerged across three in- stantiations of fluency ( visual perceptual fluency , conceptual TABLE 1 Sample Words From Study 3 Word Sample definition offered by a player Word complexity ( 1–10 ) Complexity percentile Euneirophrenia The belief that anything is possible with the correct medication 7.90 100 Tyrosemiophily The love of creating new genres within art 7.48 98 Beestings A type of spiced Scottish sausage 2.07 2 Redknees Theatrical term referring to an adult actor who plays the part of a child by walking on their knees 2.13 4 Note .
Euneirophrenia and tyrosemiophily are examples of complex words for which players tended to give abstract definitions , and beestings and redknees are examples of less complex words for which players tended to give more concrete definitions .
3The coders agreed on 59.2 % of the codes , so , as in Study 1b , a third coder resolved inconsistencies between the two original coders .
We were concerned by the low level of interrater agreement , so two additional blind raters coded the statements on a scale from 1 ( entirely abstract ) to 5 ( entirely concrete ) .
The level of interrater agreement was significantly higher ( a 5 .66 ) , and analyses using these ratings showed again that players created more abstract definitions for more complex words , b5.11 , p5 .005 , prep 5 .99 .
To further ensure that the effects were not an artifact of interrater disagreement , we eliminated the defi- nitions for which the ratings differed by more than 2 points on the 5-point scale .
Raters coded the remaining statements with a high level of consistency ( a 5 .88 ) , and the effect persisted , b 5 .09 , p < .05 , prep 5 .93 .
4The effect size in Study 3 is markedly stronger than the effect sizes in Studies 1b and 2b , probably because of the strength of the fluency manipulation in Study 3 .
The font manipulation in Study 1b and the conceptual priming manipulation in Study 2b were quite subtle , whereas words such as euneiro- phrenia and tyrosemiophily are considerably more difficult to process than are words like beestings and redknees .
Volume 19—Number 2 165 Adam L. Alter and Daniel M. Oppenheimer at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from priming fluency , and linguistic fluency ) and in both controlled laboratory studies and a more naturalistic setting .
Although earlier research demonstrated that psychologically distant stimuli are perceived more abstractly than psychologi- cally near stimuli , the experimenters typically induced psy- chological distance through explicit instruction ( but see , e.g. , Bar-Anan et al. , 2006 ) .
The present research therefore makes two important contributions : First , Studies 1a and 2a identify processing fluency as a mechanism that drives spontaneous inferences of psychological distance .
Second , Studies 1b , 2b , and 3 show that processing fluency determines how people represent and construe stimuli , along a continuum from con- cretely to abstractly .
As this research suggests , the effects of disfluency on construal might be driven , in part , by the effects of disfluency on distance perception .
Alternatively , disfluency might diminish the perceiver ’ s ability to perceive the target ’ s details , directly compelling a more abstract construal of the target .
Figuratively , as each individual tree begins to blur , the perceiver has no choice but to focus on the forest at large .
These studies also represent a novel approach to the study of fluency .
To date , most research on fluency has investigated the vast array of direct effects of fluency on judgments .
For example , stocks with more easily pronounced names appear more valuable ( Alter & Oppenheimer , 2006 ) , the simpler of two semantically identical texts seems to come from a more intelligent author ( Oppenheimer , 2006 ) , and people are more confident in intuitive judgments than in those that challenge intuition ( Simmons & Nelson , 2006 ) .
However , researchers have only recently begun to consider the indirect effects of fluency on judgment .
In addition to showing the direct influence of fluency on judgments of distance , this article shows that fluency influences judgment indirectly by changing how people construe or represent stimuli .
Situations will elicit different judgments depending on which elements of those situa- tions the perceiver represents ; judgments of the desirability of a visit to the dentist will depend on whether a person is thinking of ‘ ‘ good oral hygiene ’ ’ ( abstract ) or ‘ ‘ having one ’ s teeth drilled with a sharp metal object ’ ’ ( concrete ) .
Thus , fluency influences judg- ments not only directly , but also indirectly by changing which aspects of the stimuli are momentarily salient .
In other research on the indirect effects of fluency on judg- ment , we ( Alter et al. , 2007 ) showed that disfluency tempers people ’ s confidence in their judgments , which leads them to approach subsequent cognitive tasks more analytically .
These effects were indirect because fluency altered the strategy with which participants processed the target stimuli , rather than how they evaluated those stimuli per se .
Also examining the indirect effects of fluency on judgment , Shah and Oppenheimer ( in press ) showed that people attend to fluently processed cues in the environment more carefully than they attend to disfluently processed cues .
These findings , along with those of the studies we have presented here , show that fluency not only has profound effects on how people evaluate targets directly , but also on how they appraise and represent those targets .
Perhaps there is value in the idea that one should read classic texts in their original form .
As colloquialisms , common vocab- ulary , and grammar change over time , new generations of readers may discover layers of abstract complexity that escaped their forebears .
Had Shakespeare jettisoned Hamlet ’ s compli- cated ‘ ‘ To be or not to be ! ’ ’ soliloquy in favor of a more straightforward exclamation of angst , Hamlet might long ago have faded into obscurity with countless other , more simplistic literary characters .
Acknowledgments—We thank Wenli Cai , Alice Cassin , Kim- berly Chapman , Margaret Gerbasi , Mickheila Jasmin , Sarah Hendershot , Nira Liberman , Eugenia Mamikonyan , Melissa Miller , Amy Ricci , and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful assistance .
This research was funded by National Science Foundation Grant 051811 .
REFERENCES Alter , A.L. , & Oppenheimer , D.M .
( 2006 ) .
Predicting short-term stock fluctuations by using processing fluency .
Proceedings of the Na- tional Academy of Sciences , USA , 103 , 9369–9372 .
Alter , A.L. , & Oppenheimer , D.M .
( 2007 ) .
Uniting the tribes of fluency to form a metacognitive nation .
Manuscript submitted for publi- cation .
Alter , A.L. , Oppenheimer , D.M. , Epley , N. , & Eyre , R.N .
( 2007 ) .
Overcoming intuition : Metacognitive difficulty activates analytic reasoning .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 136 , 569–576 .
Bar-Anan , Y. , Liberman , N. , & Trope , Y .
( 2006 ) .
The association be- tween psychological distance and construal level : Evidence from an implicit association test .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 135 , 609–622 .
Bryant , D.J. , & Tversky , B .
( 1999 ) .
Mental representations of spatial relations from diagrams and models .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 25 , 137–156 .
Castel , A.D. , McCabe , D.P. , & Roediger , H.L. , III .
( 2007 ) .
Illusions of competence and overestimation of associative memory for iden- tical items : Evidence from judgments of learning .
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 14 , 107–111 .
Collins , A.M. , & Loftus , E.F. ( 1975 ) .
A spreading-activation theory of semantic processing .
Psychological Review , 82 , 407–428 .
Fujita , K. , Henderson , M.D. , Eng , J. , Trope , Y. , & Liberman , N. ( 2006 ) .
Spatial distance and mental construal of social events .
Psycho- logical Science , 17 , 278–282 .
Henderson , M.D. , Fujita , K. , Trope , Y. , & Liberman , N. ( 2006 ) .
Transcending the ‘ ‘ here ’ ’ : The effect of spatial distance on social judgment .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 91 , 845– 856 .
Kahneman , D. , & Tversky , A .
( 1979 ) .
Prospect theory : An analysis of decisions under risk .
Econometrica , 47 , 313–327 .
Liberman , N. , & Trope , Y .
( 1998 ) .
The role of feasibility and desir- ability considerations in near and distant future decisions : A test of temporal construal theory .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 75 , 5–18 .
166 Volume 19—Number 2 Fluency and Construal at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from Liberman , N. , Trope , Y. , & Stephan , E. ( 2007 ) .
Psychological distance .
In E.T .
Higgins & A.W .
Kruglanski ( Eds .
) , Social psychology : A handbook of basic principles ( 2nd ed. , Vol .
2 , pp .
353–383 ) .
New York : Guilford Press .
Oppenheimer , D.M .
( 2004 ) .
Spontaneous discounting of availability in frequency judgment tasks .
Psychological Science , 15 , 100–105 .
Oppenheimer , D.M .
( 2006 ) .
Consequences of erudite vernacular uti- lized irrespective of necessity : Problems with using long words needlessly .
Applied Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 139–156 .
Oppenheimer , D.M. , & Frank , M.C .
( in press ) .
A rose in any other font wouldn ’ t smell as sweet : Fluency effects in categorization .
Cog- nition .
Reber , R. , & Schwarz , N. ( 1999 ) .
Effects of perceptual fluency on judgments of truth .
Consciousness and Cognition , 8 , 338–342 .
Reder , L.M .
( 1987 ) .
Strategy selection in question answering .
Cogni- tive Psychology , 19 , 111–138 .
Shah , A.K. , & Oppenheimer , D.M .
( in press ) .
Easy does it : The role of fluency in cue weighting .
Judgment and Decision Making .
Simmons , J.P. , & Nelson , L.D .
( 2006 ) .
Intuitive confidence : Choosing between intuitive and nonintuitive alternatives .
Journal of Ex- perimental Psychology : General , 135 , 409–428 .
Small , D.A. , & Simonsohn , U .
( 2006 ) .
Friends of victims : Personal experience and prosocial behavior .
Retrieved November 20 , 2007 , from http : //ssrn.com/abstract=850108 Todorov , A. , Goren , A. , & Trope , Y .
( 2007 ) .
Probability as a psycho- logical distance : Construal and preference .
Journal of Experi- mental Social Psychology , 43 , 473–482 .
Trope , Y. , & Liberman , N. ( 2003 ) .
Temporal construal .
Psychological Review , 110 , 401–421 .
Unkelbach , C. ( 2006 ) .
The learned interpretation of cognitive fluency .
Psychological Science , 17 , 339–345 .
Wakslak , C.J. , Trope , Y. , Liberman , N. , & Alony , R. ( 2006 ) .
Seeing the forest when entry is unlikely : Probability and the mental repre- sentation of events .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 135 , 641–653 .
Whittlesea , B.W.A .
( 1993 ) .
Illusions of familiarity .
Journal of Experi- mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 19 , 1235– 1253 .
Winkielman , P. , & Cacioppo , J.T .
( 2001 ) .
Mind at ease puts a smile on the face : Psychophysiological evidence that processing facilita- tion leads to positive affect .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 81 , 989–1000 .
( RECEIVED 5/18/07 ; REVISION ACCEPTED 7/24/07 ) Volume 19—Number 2 167 Adam L. Alter and Daniel M. Oppenheimer at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from
