Baldassarri_AmJournSocio_2015_LeyB.pdf
aAKuAtEWxVrvbhGoqZrfOYW7lxla-Baldassarri_AmJournSocio_2015_LeyB.pdf.plain.html

Cooperative Networks : Altruism , Group Solidarity , Reciprocity , and Sanctioning in Ugandan Producer Organizations1 Delia Baldassarri New York University Repeated interaction and social networks are commonly considered viable solutions to collective action problems .
This article identifies and systematicallymeasures four general mechanisms—that is , generalized altruism , group solidarity , reciprocity , and the threat of sanctioning— and tests which of them brings about cooperation in the context of Ugandan producer organizations .
Using an innovative methodologi- cal framework that combines “ lab-in-the-field ” experiments with sur- vey interviews and complete social networks data , the article goes be- yond the assessment of a relationship between social networks and collective outcomes to study the mechanisms that favor cooperative behavior .
The article first establishes a positive relationship between position in the network structure and propensity to cooperate in the producer organization and then uses farmers ’ behavior in dictator and public goods games to test different mechanisms that may account for such a relationship .
Results show that cooperation is induced by pat- terns of reciprocity that emerge through repeated interaction rather than other-regarding preferences like altruism or group solidarity .
Repeated interaction and social networks are commonly considered viable solutions to collective action problems ðGould 1993 ; Marwell and Oliver 1993 ; Kim and Bearman 1997 ; Diani andMcAdam 2003Þ .
In a related vein , AJS Volume 121 Number 2 ( September 2015 ) : 355–95 355 1I am grateful to Alex Barnard , Guy Grossman , Eliana Horn , Sylvie Hoster , Vivian Lu , and our local team of interviewers for excellent research assistance .
I thank Maria Abascal , Peter Bearman , Guy Grossman , Mark Lubell , and the AJS reviewers for help- ful comments .
I gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation © 2015 by The University of Chicago .
All rights reserved .
0002-9602/2015/12102-0001 $ 10.00 many studies of social capital assume that social networks and associational life can be beneficial to the collectivity ðColeman 1990 ; Portes 1998 ; Putnam 2000 ; Lin , Cook , and Burt 2001Þ .
However , assessing the relationship be- tween social networks and prosocial behavior is not sufficient in order to determine the building blocks of cooperation .
If one wants to understand how cooperation emerges in a specific social setting , it is important to focus on how patterns of social relations affect actors ’ motives and their expec- tations about others ’ behavior .
In other words , we need to go beyond the observation that patterns of social relations matter for cooperation , to study the mechanisms through which social relations may enhance collective out- comes .
Scholars have advanced different theories .
On the one hand , there are interest-based explanations according to which repeated interactions set the basis for reciprocity and mutual sanctioning ; repeated interaction makes it convenient for individuals to cooperate because long-term gains will offset the benefit of one-shot free riding .
On the other hand , there are other-regarding explanations based on altruism , group solidarity , and norms of fairness ðAxelrod 1984 ; Gambetta 1988 ; Ostrom 2000 ; Fehr and Gächter 2002 ; Nowak and Sigmund 2005Þ .
However , in both the literature on col- lective action and that on social capital , these mechanisms are rarely com- pared with each other or tested across diverse settings ðCook , Levi , and Hardin 2009Þ .
In this article , I identify and systematically measure four general mechanisms , that is , generalized altruism , group solidarity , reci- procity , and the threat of sanctioning .
This article makes three theoretical contributions .
First , it organizes the vast , multidisciplinary literature on decentralized solutions to collective ac- tion problems into four distinctive mechanisms and discusses their scope conditions .
Second , it articulates the different ways in which social net- works are implicated in each of the four mechanisms , thus contributing to our general understanding of the role of social networks in bringing about cooperation in small groups .
Third , it connects the literature on collective action and social capital to some recent developments in behavioral eco- nomics , providing a blueprint for research design in this area .
I test the four alternative mechanisms in a context uniquely suited to this goal : Ugandan farmer cooperatives that face collective action problems on a regular basis .
These producer organizations were created as part of Uganda ’ s largest recent rural development intervention , whose goal was to support small farmers ’ integration into commercial farming by exploiting ðgrant SES½IOS-0924778Þ , the Princeton Institute for International andRegional Studies , and the Dondena Center at Bocconi University .
This work is dedicated to the memory of JerryMarwell.Direct correspondence toDeliaBaldassarri , Department of Sociology , New York University , 295 Lafayette Street , 4th Floor , New York , New York , 10012 .
E-mail : delia.b @ nyu.edu American Journal of Sociology 356 economies of scale and improving their productivity and management skills .
By adopting an innovative methodological framework that com- bines “ lab-in-the-field ” experiments with survey interviews and complete social networks data , this article goes beyond the assessment of a rela- tionship between social networks and collective outcomes to study the mechanisms that undergird cooperative behavior .
To achieve this goal , I took behavioral games , typically conducted in a laboratory environment , to the field .
Members of farmer cooperatives participated in different variants of the dictator game and public goods game , providing reliable behavioral measures of their other-regarding preferences and cooperative capacity .
The empirical analysis unfolds as follows .
First , relying on detailed so- cial network information , I assess the relationship between social network position and collective outcomes , showing that farmers with greater net- work centrality and nonredundant social ties are more cooperative and participate more in the life of their producer organization .
Second , I use lab-in-the-field experiments to distinguish between different mechanisms , such as generalized altruism , group solidarity , reciprocity , and threat of sanctioning .
This experimental component of the research makes it possible to establish the causal effect of group attachment on prosocial behavior and the causal effects that repeated interaction and the threat of sanctioning both have on cooperation .
Not only does performing laboratory experiments in a field setting with members of preexisting groups increase the external and ecological validity of the findings ; more importantly , it makes it possible to relate experi- mental behavior to “ real-life , ” observational behavior .
That is , in the third part of the analysis I relate farmers ’ behavior in behavioral games to their level of cooperation in the producer organization in order to identify which mechanisms are more likely to account for levels of cooperation in the far- mer groups .
In this framework , the experimental intervention is therefore used as a “ petri dish ” to isolate the mechanisms that are likely to be at work in “ real life. ” Results show that , in the context of the farmer organizations object of this study , cooperation is not induced by other-regarding mech- anisms such as generalized altruism or group solidarity .
Rather , it is the mechanism of reciprocity that emerges through sustained interaction that facilitates cooperation among local producers .
COOPERATION FROM FIRST PRINCIPLES Public goods provision is usually framed as a problem of cooperation be- tween self-interested actors : in a context in which public goods are non- excludable , rational , self-interested actors would rather free ride on others ’ contribution than cooperate ðOlson 1965Þ .
The success of this analytical framework is due to its capacity to capture the tension between individual Cooperative Networks 357 and collective interest— “ the disparity between individual optimization and collective optimality ” ðColeman 1989 , p. 5Þ—and therefore reveal the social dilemma that limits the occurrence of many instances of collective action.2 However , even supporters of rational choice approachðesÞ have conceded that we see more cooperation than expected under the assumption of self- ish actors ðOpp 1999 ; Elster 2007 ; Fehr and Gintis 2007 ; Kronenberg and Kalter 2012Þ , and over the years , the debate on the problem of collective action has expanded to include aspects that transcend its original formula- tion ðGould 1993 ; Marwell and Oliver 1993 ; Heckathorn 1996 ; Ostrom 1998 ; Baldassarri 2009Þ .
Various solutions have been advanced to explain how individuals could possibly overcome collective action problems .
Here , I organize them along two analytical dimensions : ðaÞ the motives actors have for cooperation and ðbÞ the beliefs actors hold about others ’ behavior .
In general , the mechanisms here identified should not be simply considered as cognitive or motivational , because they are also affected by actors ’ expec- tations about other actors and by their definition of the situation ðcf .
Os- trom ’ s ½2010 concept of “ action situation ” Þ.3 Motives Scholars have ranged the entire spectrum from selfish to altruistic behavior in discussing the motives actors have for cooperation .
Without necessar- ily abandoning the assumption of self-interested actors , scholars have ad- vanced solutions to the collective action problem based on selective incen- tives ðOlson 1965Þ , as well as population heterogeneity and the shape of the production function ðMarwell and Oliver 1993Þ .
On the opposite side of the motivation spectrum , there are arguments and empirical evidence supporting the altruistic , prosocial nature of human behavior ðFehr and Gächter 2002 ; Henrich et al .
2006Þ .
Finally , evolutionary models have often relied on the heterogeneity of social preferences , arguing that cooperation in society may be due to a balance between egoistic and altruistic types ðOstrom 2000 ; Fehr and Gintis 2007Þ .
In between purely selfish and purely altruistic alternatives , there are in- termediate solutions based on the idea that individuals do not act solely on the basis of selfish motivations but tend to include other-regarding preferences in their cost-benefit calculation , to reflect their level of inequity aversion ðFehr and Schmidt 1999 ; Barr , Lindelow , and Sernees 2009Þ , or their attachment toward kin , social groups , or members of their social 2A social dilemma is “ a situation in which actions that are individually rational can lead to outcomes that are collectively irrational ” ðHeckathorn 1996 , p. 250Þ .
3Moreover , they should also be conceived as orientations that develop as a consequence of group membership , repeated interaction , etc. , instead of being conceived as enduring qualities of the person .
American Journal of Sociology 358 networks ðGould 1993 ; Kim and Bearman 1997 ; Chen and Li 2009Þ .
Social life is in fact regulated by norms of fairness that constrain selfish behav- ior ðDurkheim ½1893 1984 ; Coleman 1988 ; Elster 1989 ; Baldassarri and Grossman 2013Þ .
Recent studies have demonstrated that generosity in- creases as the social distance between ego and alter diminishes .
Individuals are most generous toward people they are directly connected to and exhibit greater prosocial behavior toward people who are a few steps removed in their social network ðe.g. , friends of friendsÞ than towardmore distant others ðLeider et al .
2009 ; Brañas-Garza et al .
2010 ; Goeree et al .
2010 ; Apicella et al .
2012Þ .
More generally , individuals are more generous toward in-group than out-group members .
In-group favoritism has been observed not only in field settings where group membership is based on ascribed categories , such as , for instance , ethnicity ðWhitt andWilson 2007Þ and religion ðAdida , Laitin , and Valfort 2010Þ , but also in cases in which groupmembership was randomly assigned ðGoette , Huffman , and Meier 2006Þ , and even in labo- ratory settings where scholars induced “ minimal ” or trivial group identities ðTajfel and Turner 1979 ; Bohnet and Frey 1999 ; Chen and Li 2009Þ.4 In this research I consider two types of motives that deviate from selfish behavior : generalized altruism , which identifies prosocial behavior toward unidentified “ others , ” and group solidarity , which identifies prosocial be- havior toward members of one ’ s social group .
Expectations The second relevant dimension in the analysis of collective action dilemmas concerns the expectations actors hold about others .
Under certain condi- tions , cooperation can emerge even among self-interested actors .
And , on the contrary , “ even if people ’ s motives are not unquestioningly egoistic , coop- eration might still encounter many obstacles ” ðGambetta 1988 , p. 216Þ .
For instance , in the classic prisoner ’ s dilemma situation , the expectation that the other actor would defect might actually induce a potentially cooperative actor to defect as well .
“ The problem , therefore , is essentially one of com- munication : even if people have perfectly adequate motives for cooperation they still need to know about each other ’ s motives and to trust each other , or at least the effectiveness of their motives .
It is necessary not only to trust 4Analytically , it is important to note that in-group favoritism can be brought about by two distinct , although interdependent , processes : social proximity , which is related to the frequency of interaction and the nature of the relationship between actors , and group attachment , which derives from the strength of one ’ s identification with a group ðBal- dassarri and Grossman 2013Þ .
Though both social proximity and group attachment may lead to in-group favoritism , proximity is based on particularized past experiences , while group attachment derives from a process of categorization inwhich individuals generalize their interpersonal experiences to a broader class of alters and relate to others even in the absence of a personal relationship ðTajfel and Turner 1979Þ .
Cooperative Networks 359 others before acting cooperatively , but also to believe that one is trusted by others ” ðGambetta 1988 , p. 216Þ .
Almost all formalmodels of collective action subsequent toOlson ’ s ð1965Þ seminal work included some form of interdependence between actors .
Inter- dependence , in most conditions , reduces the uncertainty ego faces about alter ’ s behavior , thus making it easier to establish whether alter will coop- erate or not , as well as to persuade alter of ego ’ s cooperative intentions .
Repeated interaction represents the simplest form of interdependence and can in itself foster cooperative behavior by allowing reciprocity to evolve , as demonstrated by Axelrod ’ s ð1984Þ evolution of cooperation via a two-person iterated prisoner ’ s dilemma ði.e. , Rapoport ’ s tit-for-tat strategyÞ .
While in a one-shot interaction individuals might benefit from selfish behavior , in re- peated interaction , defection might no longer be the best strategy for a self- regarding actor , because his defectionmight lead to alter ’ s defection in future interactions .
The successful strategy in the longer run is to elicit cooperation from the other actor .
Mechanisms of direct ðA → B , B → AÞ and indirect ðA → B , B → CÞ reciprocity predicated on the same logic have acquired a central role in evo- lutionary biology in recent years , as they are often used to explain altruistic behavior toward nonkin and the evolution of cooperation in relatively large social groups ðTrivers 1971 ; Nowak and Sigmund 2005Þ .
Similarly , social exchange theorists have highlighted the consequences of reciprocal and gen- eralized exchange on collective outcomes ðYamagishi and Cook 1993 ; Bear- man 1997 ; Molm 2010Þ .
It should be noticed that reciprocity , as conceived here , does not necessarily require actors to carry other-regarding preferences .
Indeed , in the context of repeated interaction , reciprocity might constitute the most effective behavior even for a fully selfish actor .
Mechanisms of direct and indirect reciprocity may emerge through con- tact between actors , since communication could enable individuals to coor- dinate , persuade , precommit , and signal trustworthiness .
Although verbal commitment is not binding , in certain instances communication has been shown to be sufficient to trigger cooperation , by affecting the beliefs actors have about each other ’ s behavior ðOstrom , Walker , and Gardner 1992Þ .
Formal models of collective action that incorporate a network structure ðGould 1993 ; Kim and Bearman 1997Þ as well as threshold models and cascades ðGranovetter 1978 ; Macy 1991 ; Watts and Dodds 2007Þ often rely on this mechanism .
However , as forcefully argued by rational choice theory scholars , com- munication is not binding and can actually be deceptive—it is “ cheap talk ” —and thus may not necessarily affect actors ’ behavior or lead to Pareto-efficient outcomes ðFarrell and Rabin 1996Þ .
Monetary and social sanctioning is often considered to be a more effective mechanism to foster cooperation in a context of repeated interaction ðFehr and Gächter 2002 ; American Journal of Sociology 360 Sigmund 2007Þ .
The threat of a fine , loss of reputation , or exclusion from the group serves as a deterrent from free riding because these sanctions change individuals ’ payoff function , increasing the cost of defection ðOber- shall 1973 ; Heckathorn 1990 ; Willer 2009Þ .
Moreover , the presence of a sanctioning system also serves as a reassurance for potential cooperators that defection would not go unpunished and thereby strengthen people ’ s beliefs that others would cooperate .
Coercion is a way “ to circumscribe the extent to which we need to trust agents or cope with them in case of distrust ” ðGambetta 1988 , p. 220Þ .
In addition to generalized altruism and group solidarity , in this research I consider two other mechanisms that might lead to greater cooperation in a context of repeated interaction : reciprocity based on verbal commitment and the threat of sanctioning .
Both mechanisms affect the beliefs actors have about other actors ’ behavior .
Scope Conditions These mechanisms are derived from different theories of collective action that span a few disciplines and , unfortunately , have been seldom compared to each other .
A discussion of their scope conditions is also missing .
For sure , from a theoretical standpoint , generalized altruism , group solidarity , reciprocity , and the threat of sanctioning are not mutually exclusive ; in- deed , several instances of collective action may be brought about by a com- bination of these mechanisms ðOstrom 2005Þ .
Moreover , instead of com- paring them in the abstract , we should specify their scope conditions by identifying the actual collective action forms and contexts in which they are more likely to operate .
First of all , all these mechanisms generally apply to small and medium- size groups in which horizontal , decentralized solutions to collective action problems emerge more easily .
Instead , in large groups ðe.g. , countries , large marketsÞ , centralized solutions ðe.g. , the police , taxation , central banksÞ are often necessary ðScholz andGray 1997 ; but see Nee andOpper ½2012 for an exceptionÞ .
While scope conditions are rarely discussed , we can infer them from the substantive research areas from which these theories have originated .
Scholars stressing the importance of group solidarity and interpersonal in- fluence are often concerned with instances of collective action that are po- litical in nature ðe.g. , volunteering , protest mobilization , political partici- pationÞ , where group dynamics and the symbolic meaning of the collective goal may accrue disproportionate importance over instrumental consider- ations ðBearman 1991 ; Gould 1995 ; Diani and McAdam 2003Þ .
This is especially the case when considering high-risk forms of collective action , such as in the case of participation in violent protests , revolutions , or suicide Cooperative Networks 361 missions , in which the effect of peer pressure and the importance of group solidarity are fundamental in explaining participation ðMcAdam 1986 ; Gambetta 2005Þ .
Although recognizing the importance of group membership and shared norms , studies that examine collective action problems in the context of primarily economic activities have instead focused mainly on instrumental reasons ; consider , for instance , the vast literature on common-pool re- sources , which addresses problems of overuse of resources such as fisheries , pastures , water , atmosphere , and so forth ðHardin 1968 ; Ostrom 1990Þ .
In this context , a system for monitoring and sanctioning is usually regarded as the most effective solution to collective action problems ðFehr and Gächter 2002 ; Camerer 2003 ; Habyarimana et al .
2007 ; Sigmund 2007Þ .
However , the empirical work of Elinor Ostrom and her collaborators also greatly con- tributed to show that communication and mechanisms of reciprocity help promote and sustain cooperation , either by themselves or in combination with peer sanctioning ðOstrom et al .
1992 ; Ostrom 2010Þ .
In addition , group size and heterogeneity are likely to affect which of these mechanisms is more effective .
Namely , as the size ðor heterogeneityÞ of the group increases and connections become sparser , reciprocity based on communication becomes more difficult to sustain , and sanctioning mechanisms must be put in place to discourage free riding ðRuttan 2008 ; Poteete , Janssen , and Ostrom 2010Þ .
Finally , explanations of collective action based on generalized altruism may be advanced in the presence of strong selection ðor self-selectionÞ pro- cesses , in which “ altruistic types ” combine their cooperative efforts , for ex- ample , in the case of volunteering .
In addition , differences in levels of gen- eralized altruism or in the proportion of altruistic types in a population are sometimes useful to understand cross-cultural comparisons , and it is prob- ably at this macrolevel that this type of explanation is most effective ðYamagishi , Cook , andWatabe 1998 ; Henrich et al .
2001 , 2010 ; Herrmann , Thóni , and Gächter 2008Þ .
NETWORKS , SOCIAL CAPITAL , AND PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR Social networks may be implicated in all the mechanisms discussed so far , although the way in which networks could matter is different for each of them .
Let us consider group solidarity .
As reviewed before , social ties to and from alters contribute to shaping ego ’ s motives and his or her other- regarding preferences .
The mechanism of group solidarity is indeed pred- icated on the idea that the extent to which ego takes into account alters ’ welfare is a function of ego ’ s social distance from alter ðTajfel and Turner 1979Þ .
Norms of fairness toward a social group depend on the attachment and frequency of exposure to the members of the group ðGoette et al .
2006 ; Whitt and Wilson 2007 ; Baldassarri and Grossman 2013Þ .
For instance , American Journal of Sociology 362 the extent to which people would forgo possible gains to benefit family members or close friends is usually greater than if they were to sacrifice for their coworkers or casual acquaintances .
We can therefore expect that the more connections one has to members of a group and the more embedded he is in such a group , the more he is likely to develop group solidarity and behave prosocially toward members of such a group .
The relation between social network position and generalized altruism is instead less obvious .
There is experimental evidence suggesting that hav- ing social ties that extend beyond the family and a close circle of friends is likely to induce greater trust in strangers , while intense family and group ties prevent trust from developing beyond group boundaries ðErmisch and Gambetta 2010 ; Yamagishi 2011Þ .
Similarly , network centrality has been found to be associated with greater trusting and trustworthy behavior in an investment game ðBarr , Ensminger , and Johnson 2009Þ .
It is possible to expect other-regarding preferences to be similarly affected .
Namely , indi- viduals with more extensive and outreaching networks may display greater levels of generalized altruism .
Extant scholarship relating network cen- trality to generosity and cooperative behavior offers rather mixed empir- ical evidence ðD ’ Exelle and Riedl 2010 ; Apicella et al .
2012Þ .
One should also consider a reversed causality pattern : namely , altruistic individualsmay be more likely to have broad social networks .
Either way , we can not ex- clude , a priori , the possibility of a relationship between social network posi- tion and generalized altruism .
Let us now consider how networks can affect the remaining two mech- anisms : reciprocity based on communication and the threat of sanctioning .
Social networks govern actors ’ interdependence and favor repeated inter- action , thus contributing to determining ego ’ s beliefs about alters ’ motives .
Social networks are pipelines through which individuals exchange infor- mation .
They also enable mechanisms of interpersonal influence and peer pressure .
Patterns of relationship are therefore vital for the development of forms of direct and indirect reciprocity ðNowak and Sigmund 2005 ; Apicella et al .
2012Þ .
Similarly , sanctioning systems are often more effective in the presence of interpersonal relationships , which allow for better enforcement and greater social control ðColeman 1988 ; Greif 1993 ; Fershtman andGneezy 2001 ; Sigmund 2007Þ .
In the light of these considerations , it becomes clear that assessing the relationship between social networks and prosocial behavior is not suffi- cient in order to determine the building blocks of cooperation .
If one wants to understand the mechanisms through which cooperation emerges in a specific social setting , it is important to focus on how patterns of social relations affect actors ’ motives ði.e. , increasing group solidarity or gener- alized altruismÞ or their expectations about others ’ behavior ði.e. , facili- tating reciprocity and sanctioning mechanismsÞ .
Cooperative Networks 363 Advancements in this direction would contribute not only to the re- search on collective action but also to the large scholarship on social capital .
Although it is beyond the scope of this section to cover the various strands of this popular concept in the social sciences,5 it should suffice to say that , at their core , most conceptions of social capital stem from the idea that so- cial relationships and associational life can positively affect individual and group outcomes.6 Unfortunately , most scholars have based their arguments on the generic assumption that social capital nurtures trust and norms of reciprocity , without specifying the microlevel mechanisms through which social capital informs social and economic behavior ðsee , e.g. , Fukuyama 1995 ; Putnam 2000Þ .
These macrolevel and cultural approaches quite often also rely on tautological explanations and fail to analytically distinguish between social capital and its consequences ðfor an account of these prob- lems , see Portes ½1998 and Abascal and Baldassarri ½2015Þ .
In contrast , scholars who have devoted attention to the microlevel mech- anisms at the basis of social capital ’ s positive outcomes ðPortes 1998 ; Lin et al .
2001 ; Burt 2005 ; Durlauf and Fafchamps 2005Þ tend to adopt a framework similar to the one discussed in the previous section .
For in- stance , in his widely cited review of the literature , Portes ð1998Þ points to the relational nature of social capital : it is the fact that alters will behave according to certain norms of conduct that allows ego to secure benefits through his social network .
Moreover , Portes organizes the sources of social capital into two broad categories : consummatory sources , which are based onmechanisms of value introjection or bounded solidarity at the community level , and instrumental sources , based instead on norms of reciprocity and enforceable trust .
These four mechanisms closely resemble the four mech- anisms considered in this research .
In sum , both collective action and social capital scholarship suggest that there are multiple ways in which social networks may affect collective out- comes and cooperation .
Identifying which mechanism is at work , that is , generalized altruism , group solidarity , reciprocity based on verbal commit- ment , or the threat of sanctioning , is crucial in order to understand the contextual and institutional factors that bring about cooperation in specific social settings .
5Social capital has become a very popular concept in the social sciences in the last 20 years , with wide application in sociology ðColeman 1990 ; Portes 1998 ; Lin et al .
2001Þ , as well as political science ðFukuyama 1995 ; Foley and Edwards 1996 ; Putnam 2000 ; Krishna 2002Þ and economics ðWoolcock 1998 ; Durlauf and Fafchamps 2005Þ .
Its dif- fusion testifies to its appeal in explaining social processes .
Simultaneously , social capital has also become an all-encompassing concept , often vaguely defined and carelessly de- ployed .
6As Portes puts it , social capital can be defined as “ the ability of actors ½individuals or groups to secure benefits by virtue of membership in social networks or other social structures ” ð1998 , p. 6Þ .
American Journal of Sociology 364 BEHAVIORAL GAMES AND LAB-IN-THE-FIELD EXPERIMENTS Motives and expectations are not immediately observable .
However , it is possible to infer them from the way people behave in controlled , experi- mental settings , and in behavioral games ðBGsÞ in particular .
BGs are abstract situations in which individuals have to allocate resources between themselves and other players .
BGs are uniquely suited to capture actors ’ interdependence in decision making , because in order to define their own strategies , participants must take into account their expectations concerning the behavior of other players .
Despite the scarce use of BGs in sociology ðwhich , I believe , is partly due to their initial association with economics and rational choice theoryÞ , in recent years there has been an interesting evolution in the use of BGs that has made them a promising tool for the social sciences , and sociology in particular.7 Initially , behavioral experiments were developed to reveal general patterns of human behavior ðMarwell and Ames 1979 ; Fehr and Gächter 2002 ; Camerer 2003Þ , using convenience samples ðoften college studentsÞ and experimental settings and protocols that guaranteed com- plete anonymity and , as much as possible , “ stripped ” participants of their background characteristics and experiences .
Over the last two decades , however , some scholars have shifted their interest toward macrocultural variations and started to play BGs with diverse populations around the world ðHenrich et al .
2001 , 2010 ; Herrmann et al .
2008 ; Yamagishi 2011Þ .
Finally , in the last 10 years , BGs have started to be used to measure indi- vidual and group differences that stem from microcontextual variations as well as personal and group experiences ðBarr 2003 ; Carpenter , Daniere , and Takahashi 2004 ; Karlan 2005 ; Fearon , Humphreys , and Weinstein 2009 ; Ermisch and Gambetta 2010 ; Grossman and Baldassarri 2012 ; Baldassarri and Grossman 2013Þ .
This last development is critical : that BGs have been shown to be sufficiently sensitive to detect differences between individuals within a society makes them an exceptionally powerful tool for research in those fields of sociology that rely on “ hard-to-measure ” concepts such as trust , authority , altruism , reciprocity , and solidarity , among others .
Second , the shift in BGs ’ use from a tool to detect universal patterns of human behavior to a measurement instrument that allows researchers to capture individual and group differences has made the identity and “ real- life ” experiences of the game participants an integral part of the research design and has led to a move from the aseptic walls of an experimental lab 7While a certain skepticism regarding the origins of BGs is understandable , most of the criticisms that motivated the disciplinary rejection of rational choice theory do not apply to more recent use of BGs .
Moreover , and quite ironically , behavioral experiments have greatly contributed to the debunking of some basic assumptions at the basis of rational choice theory .
Cooperative Networks 365 to natural settings .
In general , lab-in-the-field behavioral experiments have greater external validity than lab-based BGs ðLevitt and List 2007 ; Jones 2010Þ , because they are carried out with subjects in their natural settings , retaining , to the greatest possible degree , their social identities and context .
Moreover , when combined with observational data , they greatly facilitate the inferential process , the identification of social mechanisms , and , under certain conditions , the assessment of causal effects ðBaldassarri and Gross- man 2011 ; Grossman and Baldassarri 2012Þ .
Adopting this new framework , I used lab-in-the-field BGs to measure farmer group members ’ levels of generalized altruism and group solidarity , as well as their cooperation propensity under reciprocity and threat of sanctioning conditions .
The full script of the behavioral games is available in the online appendix .
Namely , I used different variants of the dictator game ðDGÞ to differentiate between different motives for prosocial behav- ior .
Traditionally , in a classic DG , two subjects are given a common en- dowment .
One of the players , randomly chosen , has to decide how to divide the money between himself or herself and the other player , the receiver .
Deciders keep to themselves whatever they have decided to allocate to themselves , while the receivers take home whatever they have been given .
The DG is conducted under conditions of anonymity .
If deciders were completely selfish , they would keep the entire endowment to themselves .
In contrast , individuals share , on average , between 20 % and 30 % of their endowment .
A few share up to half , whereas the modal behavior is to give nothing .
Behavior in a DG is usually interpreted as an expression of other- regarding preferences ðor inequality aversionÞ and used to classify indi- viduals as selfish or altruistic types ðCamerer 2003 ; Barr , Lindelow , and Sernees 2009Þ.8 Although some people are more altruistic than others , individuals are not universally altruistic or selfish .
In contrast , a few studies have docu- mented that prosocial behavior is contingent on the perceived social dis- tance between the giver and the receiver .
By changing the information set about the actors , scholars have tested whether norms of fairness vary as a function of the recipient ’ s identity and the level of anonymity of the sender .
Some studies have elicited more or less fictional group identities in labo- ratory settings ðBohnet and Frey 1999Þ , while others have shown the pos- itive effect of group identification on prosocial behavior with respect to ascribed categories , such as ethnicity and gender ðWhitt and Wilson 2007 ; 8Some scholars have argued that behavior in DGs can be influenced by social norms ðe.g. , individuals do what the average person will doÞ and suggested that individuals might have different preferences but prefer to follow group norms ðKonow 2010Þ .
In this article , I interpret individuals ’ behavior in a DG as an indicator of their level of prosocial behav- ior and remain agnostic as to whether this behavior reflects individuals ’ preferences or is in part affected by social norms .
American Journal of Sociology 366 Abascal 2015Þ , randomly assigned memberships ðChen and Li 2009 ; Goette et al .
2012Þ , or shared experiences ðGilligan , Pasquale , and Samii 2014Þ .
Scholars have also considered proximity in social networks , and results have shown greater levels of prosocial behavior between individuals who are directly connected , especially if the tie is particularly strong ðLeider et al .
2009 ; Goeree et al .
2010 ; Apicella et al .
2012Þ .
In this research , I follow the strategy of changing the identity of the recipient to distinguish between gen- eralized altruism and group solidarity .
Namely , participants will be asked to divide their endowment between themselves and a stranger , tomeasure their level of generalized altruism , and between themselves and a member of their farmer group , to measure their group solidarity .
I use different versions of an iterated public goods game ðPGGÞ to study the evolution of cooperation under different conditions of interdependence .
In a classic PGG , participants anonymously decide how to split an initial endowment between private and public accounts .
What players put in the private account remains theirs , while what is contributed to the public ac- count is doubled and redistributed evenly among all group members , re- gardless of their level of contribution .
The most profitable outcome for the group occurs when all players contribute their entire endowment .
None- theless , regardless of what other people contribute , the most profitable strat- egy for the individual is to keep the entire endowment in his private account and benefit from what everyone else contributes to the public account .
De- signed to induce a social dilemma , PGGs capture how players balance self- interest and the well-being of the group ðCamerer 2003Þ .
Experimental evidence shows that in PGGs participants initially con- tribute , on average , between 40 % and 60 % of their endowment .
In repeated games , however , conditional cooperators who wish to avoid being exploited by free riders gradually refrain from cooperation , leading to a drop in con- tributions in subsequent rounds ðOstrom 2000 ; Fischbacher , Gächter , and Fehr 2001Þ .
By contrast , when participants are allowed to punish other sub- jects , overall levels of contributions increase , since conditional cooperators can discipline defectors ðLubell and Scholz 2001 ; Fehr and Gächter 2002 ; Gintis et al .
2005Þ .
While sanctioning is widely considered the most com- mon solution to collective action problems , scholars have also shown that face-to-face communication produces substantial increases in cooperation , thus disconfirming the rational choice expectation that communication with- out binding commitment is “ cheap talk ” and would not have any effect on cooperation ðOstrom et al .
1992 ; Frank , Gilovich , and Regan 1993 ; Bohnet and Frey 1999Þ .
In this research , I implement a communication variant of the PGG to test whether repeated interaction is per se capable of leading members of producer organizations to greater levels of cooperation , and I implement a centralized sanctioning variant to measure the extent to which group members are sensitive to the threat of sanctioning .
Cooperative Networks 367 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL CAPITAL Development scholars regard producer organizations as a core component of poverty reduction strategies ðNarayan-Parker 2002 ; Birchall 2003Þ .
State withdrawal ðBates 1981Þ and the ðrelativeÞ democratization of public life in many developing countries have encouraged the rapid proliferation of local-level , voluntary-based organizations , which are created to provide col- lective goods to their members .
This proliferation was also driven by the active support of the World Bank , international nongovernmental orga- nizations , and other agencies , which have been working since the mid- 1990s with a paradigm that stresses the positive effects of participatory and community-driven development , decentralization , and social capital on development ðHussi 1993 ; Stockbridge et al .
2003Þ .
Early rural development studies aimed mainly at showing the benefits of organizing farmers ðDeininger 1995Þ , while more recent scientific research has increasingly focused on intervention design and the comparison of different intervention strategies , often relying on randomized evaluation ðBingen , Serrano , and Howard 2003 ; Banerjee and Duflo 2010Þ .
Instead of focusing on average intervention effects or variation across interventions , this article focuses on within-intervention variation and aims at identify- ing the endogenous social factors that affect the level of success of an in- tervention .
The farmer organizations that are the object of this study were all created by the same development intervention and were given very similar organizational structures , directives , and goals .
However , the rate of success greatly varied across farmer groups , and such variation in out- comes is not accounted for by preexisting conditions ðlike the level of de- velopment of the areaÞ , the physical characteristics of the land ðe.g. , ele- vation , rainfall , and quality of soilÞ , or ethnic and cultural differences .
My working hypothesis is that emerging patterns of social relations have helped certain farmer organizations to overcome collective action problems by facilitating the spread of information , trust , and accountability practices .
Development scholars have already documented the role of social cap- ital in reducing the effects of poverty and inequalities by showing how in- formal relations and voluntary organizations can favor the spontaneous creation of protection systems and help to overcome collective action prob- lems ðCollier 1998 ; Gittell and Vidal 1998 ; Grootaert and Bastelaer 2002 ; Krishna 2002Þ , facilitate the diffusion of information and adoption of ag- ricultural innovations ðFafchamps and Minten 1999 ; Isham 2000Þ , develop microcredit programs ðKhandker 1998 ; Yunus 1998Þ , and foster civic en- gagement and the democratic process ðGittell and Vidal 1998 ; Carrol 2001Þ .
Despite its achievements , the economic development research has important limitations .
Mostly dominated by a macro ðor functionalistÞ approach to social capital , this research rarely goes beyond the intuition that “ better- American Journal of Sociology 368 connected people do better ” to investigate the actual network characteristics from which individuals derive their positional advantage ðSobel 2002Þ .
In addition , scholars base their arguments on the generic assumption that social capital nurtures trust and norms of reciprocity , without specifying the mechanisms through which social capital operates or trust is produced .
Finally , the measurement of the concept is far from satisfying .
Scholars usu- ally rely on survey-based measures of trust and membership in formal and informal associations , while more appropriate measurements—that is , be- havioral experiments ðDurlauf and Fafchamps 2005Þ and social networks surveys ðBurt 2000 ; Sobel 2002Þ—are rarely pursued .
THE STUDY CONTEXT : PRODUCER ORGANIZATIONS IN UGANDA For its scope , relative uniformity of the intervention , and focus on collec- tive marketing , the Agriculture Productivity Enhancement Project ðAPEPÞ offers an extraordinary opportunity to study the building blocks of economic cooperation.9 One of Uganda ’ s largest recent rural development interven- tions , APEP helped organize over 60,000 farmers into about 2,500 village- level groups ðknown as producer organizations , or POsÞ between 2004 and 2009 .
These groups were further organized into more than 200 farmer associations ðknown as depot committees , or DCsÞ serving , on average , 200 members from 10 neighboring POs.10 The process of group formation occurred under the guidance of a few project field trainers .
As a conse- quence , APEP groups have similar organizational and governance struc- ture .
All strategic decisions are made at the DC level by a farmer association council , which is led by a few executives—usually a manager , chairperson , and secretary—under the supervision of two elected farmer representatives per PO.11 The goal of these farmer associations was to support the integration of small-holder producers into commercial farming by exploiting economies of scale , increasing productivity , and bargaining for better prices .
Their 9APEP was funded by the U.S. Agency for International Development and imple- mented by Chemonics , a Washington , D.C. , consultancy .
10While village-level POs had neither the organizational capacity nor the volume to become significant economic entities , DCs were better positioned to exploit economies of scale .
11This DC council meets two to four times a year and is responsible for connecting village-level POs to the DC .
It is also responsible for providing oversight and monitoring of the DC manager , the most important officeholder , whose responsibilities range from overseeing all wholesale marketing activities to negotiating prices , coordinating the dif- fusion of information , and organizing training sections .
Village-level POs are implement- ing bodies , mainly responsible for carrying out decisions made at the DC level , passing information from and to the farmers , and training them .
Cooperative Networks 369 major activity was collective marketing , also referred to as “ bulking , ” or selling in bulk .
Given the high costs of transportation and market infor- mation , in the absence of POs , small farmers ’ only option is to sell their crops to local middlemen , who likely exploit information asymmetries and bargaining power , offering unorganized farmers below-market prices .
By contrast , organized farmers can bypass these middlemen and obtain higher prices through collective marketing ðStaatz 1987Þ .
Thus , the most common problem for small producers in rural Uganda ðas well as in many other underdeveloped regions around the worldÞ is to bypass these speculative middlemen and sell their products at competitive market prices .
Some of the farmer organizations were able to achieve high levels of collective marketing ; others did not .
Depending on their success , these organizations were also able to provide several other services , from training to input procurement ðe.g. , buying seedlings , fertilizers , and her- bicides in bulkÞ , and offer small loans to their members .
Though highly valuable , most of these activities are subjected to various social dilemmas .
First of all , these groups have to overcome coordination problems .
For instance , in order to sell their crop in bulk , farmers need to agree on a place , day , and time in which all of them will convene to a central location to pool their produce .
Second , they have to overcome thresh- old problems , which are situations in which a sufficient number of other participants is needed for the collective activity to become beneficial .
For instance , renting a truck to bring the crop to themarket becomes convenient only if a sufficient number of other farmers share its cost .
Similarly , switch- ing to a more remunerative crop ðe.g. , coffeeÞ becomes convenient only if enough other farmers actually do the same .
Finally , they have to overcome the quintessential social dilemma , the free-rider problem , which is a situation in which everybody would benefit from the provision of a public good , but it is better if others bear the cost of its provision .
Collective marketing offers a good example of how these farmer groups constantly face free-rider problems .
Through collective mar- keting , farmer organizations can sell their produce directly to buyers in ma- jor markets , bypassing the local middleman .
Once a farmer group is in place , however , local middlemen tend to raise their offers to remain competitive .
Since middlemen , unlike most farmer groups , collect crops at the farmers ’ gate and pay cash on delivery , members have a private interest in selling to middlemen.12 The private gain of selling to middlemen ð “ defecting ” Þ , how- ever , is conditional on a sufficient number of other members selling their crops via the farmer group ð “ cooperating ” Þ .
Yet , if toomanymembers defect , 12 In contrast , when selling their crop through the farmer organization , farmers entrust their produce to the manager and usually have to wait a few weeks before receiving their payment .
American Journal of Sociology 370 collective marketing collapses , and the middlemen will lower their price.13 Farmer organizations face the free-rider problems in other situations as well .
For instance , to increase the quality of their crop , and therefore the selling price , farmers have to use fertilizers and follow labor-intensive procedures , such as handpicking coffee beans , drying them on specific carpets , and so forth .
Since farmers mix their coffee and then sell it collectively , the over- all quality of the produce depends on everybody ’ s effort .
Thus , individual farmers face a constant trade-off between working hard to increase the quality of their produce and instead free riding on the work of others .
A stratified , random , multistage cluster design was used to sample re- search participants.14 First , I sampled 50 farmer organizations ðDCsÞ .
Within each organization , all the members of the farmer association council were interviewed ðN 5 1,447Þ .
Although the research also included a rep- resentative sample of farmers that were drawn from six POs per DC , results reported in this article concern members of the DC councils exclusively .
Each council member was surveyed in person by trained interviewers in the respondents ’ language ði.e. , Basoga , Luganda , and RanyankoleÞ and participated in a series of BGs .
The surveys included a social network mod- ule that provides complete network information for each of the 50 farmer councils in the sample .
Additional information about the farmer organiza- tion was collected in group interviews with the DC executives .
Data on the DCs ’ economic activities were also assembled from the associations ’ books and records when available.15 Expectations In light of the previous discussion on the building blocks of cooperation and their scope conditions , which are the mechanisms that make it possi- ble to overcome free-rider problems in the context of Ugandan farmer co- operatives ?
Given the economic nature of the activity of these farmer groups , I expect instrumental considerations , and thus mechanisms of reciprocity based on verbal commitment and the threat of sanctioning , to play a leading role .
Research on regular farmer members has shown that sanctioning and 13The reason is that the price offered by middlemen depends on the price that the farmer group secures ð “ yardstick effect ” Þ , which itself crucially depends on volume .
Some groups manage to overcome this tension between private and group interests , while many others fail .
14A detailed description of the sampling scheme can be found in the online appendix , along with additional information in the research implementation .
15Only 1,097 of the subjects interviewed participated in the BGs .
This gap arises be- cause the experiments were conducted , in each DC , on a single day in a central location ; to reduce attrition , interviewers returned to villages several times to locate members who were not present during the main day of data collection .
Cooperative Networks 371 leader ’ s legitimacy play an important role in explaining cooperation rates ðGrossman and Baldassarri 2012Þ .
While regular members do not maintain stable relationships with each other , nor do they participate directly in the activity of the council , the subjects of the current analysis are active mem- bers of the DC councils and experience repeated interaction with other members of the farmer group on a regular basis ; thus , they may have devel- oped mechanisms of reciprocity based on verbal commitments .
The small size of DC councils may also enhance the capacity of direct communication and even make it more effective than sanctioning ðOstrom 2010Þ .
In addition , given their commitment to represent their villages in the farmer cooperatives meetings , one can also expect that they have developed a meaningful identification with the farmer organization , which could lead to greater group solidarity .
Instead , we should not expect generalized al- truism to be an explanation for different rates of cooperation across farmer cooperatives .
In fact , on the basis of the information collected at the regional and farmer group levels , there is no reason to believe that cooperative types are differently distributed across villages nor that theywould join the farmer groups at different rates .
In other words , in the absence of specific selection processes , generalized altruism should not make a difference at the group level .
However , I do not exclude this possibility a priori ; thus I included experimental measures of generalized altruism in the data collection , and I control for levels of generalized altruism in the analyses .
RESULTS The first step of the analysis is to establish a positive relationship , based on observational data , between social network position and cooperation .
I then use lab-in-the-field experiments to distinguish differentmechanisms ði.e. , generalized altruism , group solidarity , reciprocity , threat of sanctioningÞ that might account for the relationship between networks and collective out- comes .
Finally , I relate individuals ’ behavior in the BG to their level of co- operation in real life to identify which mechanism is more likely to account for differences in levels of cooperation .
Social Networks and Cooperation in the Producer Organization Theories of collective action and social capital both suggest a relationship between social network structure and collective outcomes .
In particular , network centralization and nonredundancy of network ties are considered to be network properties important for the provision of public goods ðGould 1993 ; Marwell and Oliver 1993 ; Burt 2004Þ .
In each of the 50 farmer organizations , I collected complete network information on the relationships among members of the DC council .
Each American Journal of Sociology 372 member of the council was presented with the complete list of other mem- bers ’ names and , for each of them , was asked whether they speak fre- quently , consider alter a close friend , have his or her phone number , and go to him or her for advice.16 For descriptive purposes , figure 1 reports the network structure of the advice network for six DCs .
For each of the four network relationships—speak , friendship , phone , advice—I consider four network measures : degree centrality , betweenness centrality , eigenvector centrality , and Burt ’ s constraint .
Degree centrality , or “ total degree , ” is the simple count of in- and out-ties and is usually con- sidered as a basic measure of ego ’ s centrality , or popularity .
Betweenness centrality is based on geodesic distance and captures the extent to which ego is instrumental in connecting otherwise disconnected alters , thus facilitat- ing the flow of information and communication ðFreeman 1979Þ .
Eigenvector centrality instead takes into account not only ego ’ s degree but also the cen- trality of the people connected to him or her and is commonly interpreted as a measure of prestige ðBonacich 1972Þ.17 Finally , Burt ’ s constraint captures the extent to which individuals are embedded in redundant relationships , thus constraining their capacity to reach out to a large set of alters .
Burt ’ s constraint is higher if ego has fewer ormutually related ði.e. , more redundantÞ ties ðBurt 2004Þ.18 In general , my expectation is that the more central actors are in the farmer network , the more likely they will be to participate in the life of the farmer cooperative.19 In contrast , high levels of constraint should lead to less cooperation , since individuals find themselves embedded in a limited set of relations .
While most studies connecting network features to collective outcomes rely on a single network , in this case I test this relationship on individual- level observations coming from 50 different networks , thus making the findings more robust .
We should , however , keep in mind that this part of 16The questions for each of these are as follows : “ Do you speak to ½NAME on a regular basis ? ” “ Is ½NAME a close friend or do you just know him or her ?
By close friend , I mean that you ðaÞ eat together regularly ; ðbÞ you can leave your child with him or her if you need to travel for several days ; and ðcÞ he or she will help you in case of a family death. ” “ Do you have ½NAME ’ s phone number ? ” “ In the past 12 months , have you asked ½NAME for information or advice on matters related to the farmer association ? ” 17The eigenvector centrality of a node is its corresponding entry in the eigenvector as- sociated with the largest eigenvalue of an adjacency matrix .
While measures of cen- trality based on degree weight every contact equally , eigenvector centrality weights links according to their centralities .
Eigenvector centrality can be conceived as a weighted sum of both direct and indirect connections and is a measure that takes into account the entire network structure .
18Other measures have been considered , such as in-degree , out-degree , closeness , clus- tering coefficient , etc. , and they lead to results that are similar to those presented here .
19 I used three different measures of centrality in order to assess the robustness of the results .
Cooperative Networks 373 F IG .
1 .— E xa m p le of ad v ic e n et w or k s in si x D C s the analysis is strictly descriptive .
And since the network data have been collected at the same time as the outcome variables , we should also ac- knowledge the possible existence of a feedback loop : while , on the one hand , social relationships facilitate the emergence of cooperation , on the other hand , the experience of cooperation is likely to strengthen social relation- ships .
The two effects can not be decoupled with the data at my disposal , although there are reasons to believe that the latter is less pronounced .
There are two key collective outcomes that are particularly relevant for the life of the farmer organizations .
The most important is the extent to which members sell their coffee through the producer organization.20 On average , 70 % of the members sold their coffee in bulk .
There is , however , a fair amount of variation across DCs .
In some producer organizations only a mere 10 % of the members sell in bulk ; in others , almost all of them rely on the producer organization .
Our secondmeasure concerns farmer partici- pation in the life of the producer organization .
In particular , we consider whether they attended the last general assembly .
On average , almost three- fourths of the members attended the assembly.21 The correlation between these two measures is .23 ðP 5 .030Þ , suggesting that they are related but likely to capture different facets of cooperation in the farmer group .
I model the relationship between network position and cooperation using multilevel logistic regressions ðvarying-intercept modelsÞ in which individ- uals are nested within producer organizations ðDCÞ , and the probability of ðaÞ of selling via farmer group and ðbÞ participating in the general assembly is estimated as a function of network position , controlling for individual- level characteristics , such as wealth , education , gender , age , and church attendance.22 Figure 2 shows the percentage change in the probability of selling via farmer group ðpanel AÞ and participating in the general assembly ðpanelBÞ as a function of a 1-SD change in the network measure for every type of network.23 Results show , for instance , that a 1-SD increase in betweenness centrality in the friendship network is related to a 4.5 % ðconfidence interval 20Here I use a binary variable .
Similar results are obtained using the proportion of the crop that is sold in bulk .
21Among regular members , 61 % sell in bulk , and 57 % attended the last general as- sembly .
Thus , the behavior of the farmer representatives is slightly more “ virtuous ” than that of regular members , but not dramatically more so .
22Formally , log Pðselling via groupÞ Pðside sellingÞ 5 m0 1 b1 Network Measure 1 b2 Individual Controls1 εi 1 εDC : 23For instance , considering the total degree measure , 1 SD corresponds , approximately , to 13 ties in the friend , speak , and advice networks and to seven ties in the phone network .
Cooperative Networks 375 F IG .2 .— R el at io ns hi p b et w ee n p os it io n in th e fa rm er n et w or k an d co op er at io n. P er ce n ta ge ch an ge in th e p ro ba bi lit y of se lli n g in bu lk ðp an el A Þ an d at te n d in g th e ge n er al as se m b ly ðp an el B Þa s a fu n ct io n of a 1- S D ch an ge in th e co rr es p on d in g n et w or k m ea su re .
B la ck p lo ts in d ic at e si gn ifi ca n t co ef fi ci en ts ; 95 % C I .
½CI 1–8Þ increase in the probability of selling one ’ s coffee through the farmer association and a 10.2 % ðCI 5–15.4Þ increase in the probability of attending the general assembly .
In general , the results show that greater network centrality , in terms of number of ties , betweenness , and prestige , is associated with greater chances of cooperation , both with respect to selling in bulk and participating in the group activities , while having redundant ties is associated with a lower likelihood of cooperation .
Individuals who span across a larger portion of the cooperative networks are more likely to bypass free-rider opportunities and contribute to public goods production .
Measuring Mechanisms with Lab-in-the-Field Experiments Having assessed the relationship between social network position and co- operation , I turn now to consider the different mechanisms that might ac- count for such a relationship .
Local producers took part in lab-in-the-field BGs through which I measured their level of prosocial behavior , distin- guishing between generalized altruism and group solidarity , and their co- operation propensity , distinguishing between a reciprocity mechanism based on communication and the threat of sanctioning .
As described in the previous section , the DG is traditionally used to mea- sure other-regarding behavior , as participants decide under conditions of anonymity and are not exposed to the risk of sanctioning or loss of reputation .
The basic version of theDG , inwhich deciders have to divide the endowment between themselves and a stranger , is commonly used as a measure of gen- eralized altruism , while versions of theDG inwhich the identity of the recipient is specified ðe.g. , ethnicity , genderÞ have been used to measure prosocial be- havior toward specific groups ðCamerer 2003 ; Whitt andWilson 2007 ; Adida et al .
2010Þ .
Inmy lab-in-the-fieldDG , each farmer groupmemberwas invited to divide two endowments between herself or himself and two different alters , whose specific identity was to remain unknown .
Each endowment was 10 coins of 100 Ugandan shillings ð10 monetary units , MUsÞ , which are equiv- alent to half a day ’ s wage in rural Uganda .
In each of the 50 farmer groups , half of the participants were randomly assigned to an experimental variant in which participants had to divide a first endowment between themselves and a stranger and a second endowment between themselves and another member of the producer organization .
The scenario in which people give to a stranger provides a measure of generalized altruism , while the scenario in which the recipient is a member of the producer association constitutes a measure of group sol- idarity .
The expectation is , of course , that individuals would give more to a member of their group than to a stranger .
However , the difference between the contribution to a stranger and the contribution to a group member might not necessarily be due to group Cooperative Networks 377 solidarity per se ; rather , it might simply reflect the fact that the social dis- tance between giver and receiver is much smaller in the case of a group member than a stranger .
To consider this possibility , the other half of the participants were assigned to a second variant of the DG , in which deciders divided their endowment with a stranger and , differently from the first variant , with someone from their village.24 Overall , the familiarity and fre- quency of interaction with covillagers are similar to those with members of the farmer group.25 If membership in the farmer organization has triggered a strong sense of group attachment , we would expect our subjects to show greater solidarity toward comembers than to covillagers ðsee online app .
III for the DG scriptÞ .
Figure 3 reports results for both variants of the DG .
Confirming pre- vious scholarship , respondents give , on average , almost 30 % of their en- dowment to a stranger .
More interestingly , compared to their contribution to strangers , group members give half a coin more to a covillager ð0.48 MU ; P < .001Þ and more than a coin to another member of the producer orga- nization ð1.12 MUs ; P < .001Þ .
Changing the identity of the recipient , namely , moving from a generalized other to a member of the in-group , increases contributions .
Moreover , group members give 0.64 MU more to a comember than to a covillager ðP < .001Þ , thus confirming the expecta- tion that group solidarity among members of the farmer organization is triggered by a sense of attachment to the group that goes beyond mere fa- miliarity with or exposure to the other members , as might be the case with covillagers .
Table A1 in the appendix reports results for the estimation of the average treatment effect in tabular form as obtained from a three-level ran- dom intercept linear regression model that controls for group and inter- viewers ’ effects .
The emergence of cooperation over repeated interaction is traditionally captured using PGGs .
Accordingly , I run a lab-in-the-field PGG in order to assess the extent to which reciprocity through communication and the threat of sanctioning are mechanisms that affect farmer groups ’ coopera- tive capacity.26 All farmer group members participated in six rounds of a PGG .
In each round , they were endowed with 10 MUs and had to decide how much to keep for themselves and how much to put in a common pot , whose content would be doubled and redistributed equally among the 24 I also randomized the order in which subjects were confronted with the choices , asking half of the subjects to first allocate the endowment to a stranger and then to a comember or covillager and asking the other half to allocate first to a comember or covillager and then to a stranger .
The order in which the choice was made does not influence the results .
25See Baldassarri and Grossman ð2013Þ for further details on this aspect .
26While there are previous instances of lab-in-the-field DGs , to my knowledge this is the first research in which a PGG has been performed in the field .
American Journal of Sociology 378 participants .
In each producer organization , group members were ran- domly assigned to one of three variants of the PGG .
In the baseline con- dition , subjects participated in six rounds of a PGGwithout punishment or communication .
In the second condition , after two preliminary rounds of play , one of the participants was elected to become a monitor endowed with sanctioning power .
Namely , monitors were able to spend 1MU to take away 3 MUs from subjects whose contribution level they disapproved.27 In the third condition , after two preliminary rounds of play , players were allowed to publicly discuss their strategy for three minutes .
This commu- nication took place at the end of every successive round ðsee online appen- dix for the PGG scriptÞ .
This setting allows for the assessment of the causal effect of communi- cation and sanctioning on levels of cooperation .
Figure 4 reports the trend in the average contribution to the public good for each of the three vari- FIG .
3.—Average contribution to a stranger and a member of the in-group in a DG .
Participants in a DG give 1.12 MUs more to members of their producer organizations ðdark gray barÞ and only 0.48 MU more to covillagers ðlight gray barÞ than to strangers ðblack barsÞ , suggesting that group attachment , and not only familiarity with the in- group , triggers prosocial behavior .
Average treatment effects are estimated using multi- level models as described in appendix table A1 .
27Monitors received the same endowment as the other subjects but could not contribute to the PGG or receive part of the common endowment .
See Baldassarri and Grossman ð2011Þ for additional information on the game .
Cooperative Networks 379 ants .
Solid lines report the observed trend for the baseline ðlight gray lineÞ , communication ðblack lineÞ , and sanctioning ðdark gray lineÞ conditions .
According to our research design , we would expect no differences between variants in the first two preliminary rounds .
This is the case for the baseline and communication variants in which subjects contributed between 45 % and 50 % of their endowment .
Unfortunately , as a result of an interviewer effect , subjects in the monitor condition contributed between 5 % and 8 % more in the two preliminary rounds , and this difference is marginally sig- nificant.28 To control for this aspect , I rely on results from multilevel mod- els that control , among the other things , for the interviewers and the con- tribution in the preliminary rounds .
The dashed line reproduces a fictional FIG .
4.—Average contribution in the PGG .
Solid lines report the observed trend for the baseline ðlight gray lineÞ , communication ðblack lineÞ , and sanctioning ðdark gray lineÞ conditions .
The dashed line reproduces a fictional trend that could be expected under optimal experimental conditions .
The average difference in contributions between communication and the baseline condition is 1.91 MUs , while the difference between sanctioning and the baseline is 1.55 MUs .
Estimates come from multilevel models re- ported in appendix table A2 .
28Since small deviations from a BG script can lead to substantial variations in the game outcomes , interviewers were instructed to follow the game script closely .
However , two interviewers who served mainly in the PGGmonitor variant slipped into the description of the game some encouragement that led participants to contribute more .
American Journal of Sociology 380 trend that could be expected under optimal experimental conditions .
Table A2 in the appendix reports the modeling strategy and results in greater detail .
Results show that in the baseline condition , in which subjects participate in multiple rounds of the PGG without any type of interaction , contribu- tions decline by almost 10 % , in line with previous experiments .
In contrast , when participants were allowed to communicate , there is a visible increase in contributions : on average , the contribution in the communication con- dition is 1.91 MUs higher ðP < .001Þ than in the baseline condition .
Re- peated interaction supported by communication is therefore effective in triggering mechanisms of reciprocity and increases the overall level of co- operation .
Although less effective , the threat of punishment leads to sim- ilar results .
Subjects in the sanctioning condition tend to give , on average , 1.55 MUs more than subjects in the baseline condition ðP < .001Þ .
Overall , I conclude that various mechanisms could be the basis of farmer group members ’ prosocial behavior and cooperative capacity .
As in many other studies , I have found that subjects display altruistic behavior toward strangers .
I also found that giving to a member of one ’ s farmer organization leads to significantly greater donations , suggesting the existence of a mech- anism of group solidarity .
Moreover , in iterated strategic interactions , the threat of sanctioning increases the likelihood of cooperation .
Finally , com- munication between participants is sufficient to elicit mechanisms of reci- procity , even in the absence of binding agreements , or the threat of sanc- tioning .
According to my research design , BGs are deployed in order to elicit mechanisms that are at work in real life and , specifically , the mechanisms that are responsible for inducing greater cooperation in the producer or- ganization .
It is now time to ask to what extent , if any , behavior in the experimental setting maps into our subjects ’ behavior in real life .
Are more altruistic farmers or those who show greater attachment to the group also more likely to cooperate ?
Or instead do mechanisms of reciprocity and sanctioning lead to greater cooperation among farmer producers ?
Cooperation in the Lab and in Real Life The last step in the analysis connects prosocial behavior in the experi- mental setting to levels of cooperation in the farmer group .
The assumption driving this analysis is that whenever we find a correlation between be- havior in the BGs and behavior in the farmer group , we can reasonably in- fer that the mechanisms that were isolated in the experimental setting might be at the basis of real-world outcomes ðPoteete et al .
2010Þ .
Figure 5 presents results from multilevel logistic regression models in which the two measures of collective outcome introduced before , namely , Cooperative Networks 381 F IG .5 .— R el at io n sh ip b et w ee n b eh av io r in B G s an d co op er at io n in th e p ro d u ce r or ga n iz at io n .P er ce n ta ge ch an ge in th e p ro b ab ili ty of se lli n g in b u lk ðp an el A Þa n d at te n d in g th e ge n er al as se m b ly ðp an el B Þa s a fu n ct io n of a 1 M U ch an ge in th e co rr es p on d in g B G .A p p en d ix ta b le s A 3 an d A 4 re p or t th es e re su lt s in ta b u la r fo rm .
B la ck p lo ts fo r si gn ifi ca n t co ef fi ci en ts ; 90 % C I. whether farmers sold their coffee through the producer organization ðpanelAÞ and whether they attended the last general assembly ðpanel BÞ , are modeled as a function of individuals ’ behavior in BGs , controlling for individual- and group-level predictors ðas in previous modelsÞ .
Since subjects were assigned to different variants of the BGs , it is necessary to compute separate models for each variant .
For instance , the left plot of panel A reports the percentage change in the probability of selling in bulk as a function of a 1MU change in the contribution to a stranger , to a comember , or to a covillager and average contribution ðin rounds 3–6Þ in the baseline condition of the PGG game.29 The center plot shows the same analysis for those subjects that were as- signed to the communication condition in the PGG , and the right plot re- ports results for those assigned to the sanctioning condition .
Tables A3 and A4 in the appendix report results for these models in tabular form .
Findings suggest that neither generalized altruism , as measured by the contribution to a stranger , nor group solidarity , as measured by the con- tribution to a member of the producer organization ðor villageÞ , is a good predictor of whether group members will sell in bulk .
In contrast , subjects ’ reciprocity in an experimental setting is predictive of their behavior in the farmer group .
In particular , those subjects who were more likely to co- operate in the PGG with communication were also more likely to sell via their farmer group : a 1 MU increase in contribution in the communication variant of the PGG corresponds to a 3.5 % increase in the likelihood of selling via the farmer group ðP 5 .024Þ.30 The corresponding figure for the baseline variant of the PGG is 21.7 % ðP 5 .161Þ and for the sanctioning variant is 2.5 % ðP 5 .174Þ .
The last two , however , do not meet minimal criteria for statistical significance .
A similar pattern can be observed with respect to the likelihood of at- tending the general assembly ðfig .
5 , panel BÞ .
The only mechanism that is significantly correlated with participation in the life of the farmer organi- zation is reciprocity : individuals who were more cooperative in the PGG with communication were also more likely to have attended the groupmeet- ing .
A 1 MU increase in the contribution in the communication variant of the PGG corresponds to a 1.9 % increase in the probability of attending the 29I have collapsed the two variants of the DG in this analysis in order to have a larger sample size and improve the quality of the estimates .
Considering the distinction be- tween the two types of recipients in the DG does not lead to substantively different results .
30Although not particularly large , the magnitude of the effect is not trivial .
Moreover , no sociodemographic predictor , when controlling for the level of contribution in behavioral games , is consistently significant ðsee app .
tables A3 and A4Þ .
In a model that includes only sociodemographic predictors , namely , gender , age , education , religiosity , and wealth , the latter is the only significant predictor of selling in bulk , and its estimated effect is smaller than the one reported for the contribution in the PGGwith communication : a unit change in the standardized measure of wealth corresponds to a 3.3 % increase in the likelihood of selling via the farmer group ðP 5 .025Þ .
Cooperative Networks 383 general assembly ðP 5 .086Þ .
Once again , the corresponding figure for the sanctioning variant of the PGG is only slightly smaller in magnitude ð1.4 % Þ but nonsignificant ðP 5 .317Þ .
In sum , of the different mechanisms considered , reciprocity is the one that stands out as being significantly correlated with cooperation in real life .
Although results from this part of the analysis can not be considered conclusive because of the sample size ðthe number of observations ranges from 197 to 370 , depending on the modelÞ , similar analyses conducted on a representative sample of regular members ðwho are not members of the DC councilÞ confirm that levels of generalized altruism and group soli- darity are not related to cooperation in the farmer group.31 While among regular farmers sanctioning and the legitimacy of the group leadership are positively related to levels of cooperation ðGrossman and Baldassarri 2012Þ,32 amongmembers of theDC council , verbal communication turns out as themost viable solution to collective action dilemmas .
In linewith findings from research on common-pool resources , in small groups with a sufficient level of commitment , face-to-face interaction can be even more effective than sanctioning in overcoming free-rider problems ðOstrom et al .
1992 ; Ostrom 2000Þ .
DISCUSSION The study of the noncontractual preconditions of economic exchanges and , in more general terms , the embeddedness of markets in social life has been at the center of sociologists ’ and economic historians ’ understanding of economic life for centuries ðWeber ½1905 1930 ; Polanyi 1944 ; Granovetter 1985 ; Greif 1993 ; Uzzi 1996 ; Burt 2005Þ .
In this research I have focused on the establishment of a novel market institution—the producer organiza- tion—to understand how local producers in development countries solve classic problems of collective action .
This setting has provided a vantage point to test theories of social networks , collective action , and social capital through an innovative research design .
Extant theories widely recognize the role of repeated interaction and so- cial networks in bringing about cooperation .
Accordingly , my analysis con- firms that individuals who occupy more central positions and those who are better able to span a large portion of the organization network tend to participate more in the production of public goods .
The novelty of my con- tribution consists in going beyond the empirical assessment of this rela- 31Results are available from the author .
32Regular farmers did not participate in the communication version of the PGG because the experience of repeated interaction with other farmer group members is not as dif- fused among them as it is among village representatives to the DC council .
American Journal of Sociology 384 tionship , to identify the specific mechanisms that bring about cooperation in a specific social setting .
Considering both the motives actors have for cooperation and the beliefs they hold about others ’ behavior , I have iden- tified four general mechanisms—generalized altruism , group solidarity , reciprocity based on verbal commitment , and the threat of sanctioning— and proceeded to test their effectiveness using behavioral games .
Namely , I took behavioral games out of the aseptic walls of the labo- ratory and brought them to the field .
By adopting an innovative meth- odological framework that combines behavioral games , network data , and survey interviews with members of Ugandan producer organizations , I was able to isolate the mechanisms that make group members cooperate in real life .
This research design fulfills sociology ’ s important aspiration , recently revived under the label of analytical sociology , to move beyond the simple assessment of correlations to investigate the mechanisms that bring about important social phenomena ðMerton 1957 ; Gambetta 1988 ; Hedström 2005 ; Hedström and Bearman 2009Þ .
To my knowledge , this article is the first to use lab-in-the-field experiments to achieve this purpose .
The payoff , I believe , is substantial .
Through a novel adaptation of the DG and PGG in which members of the farmer organizations were randomly assigned to different game vari- ants , I was able to demonstrate that , in our population of interest , group attachment leads to levels of solidarity toward members of the group that are substantially higher than general levels of altruism toward strangers and toward nonmembers and that both mechanisms of reciprocity and the threat of sanctioning lead to greater public goods provision .
This experi- mental component allows us to decouple these different mechanisms and to draw causal conclusions about their effects in the population of interest .
The value added of carrying out behavioral experiments in a field set- ting is the capacity to relate behavior observed in the “ real ” setting to the mechanisms captured in the controlled experimental setting .
In this ana- lytical framework , the lab-in-the-field experiment is therefore used as a “ petri dish ” in order to isolate the mechanisms that are likely to be at work in real life .
In particular , the experimental design makes it possible to conclude that the relationship between BGs and real-life behavior is not due to unobserved heterogeneity .
Since , within each producer organization , participants have been randomized to different BGs variants , we can ex- clude that the relationship between BGs and real-life behavior is spurious and is brought about by some unobserved factors .
However , we can not exclude that some other , independent mechanisms is also to work .
In the context of producer organizations , other-regarding preferences , in the form of either generalized altruism or group solidarity , do not seem to be the motivations that trigger cooperation among local farmers .
Rather , rec- iprocity emerging through communication is the mechanism most strongly Cooperative Networks 385 related to cooperation in the producer organization .
I conclude from this that sustained interaction and verbal commitment are therefore sufficient con- ditions , in this context , for making cooperation convenient and discouraging free riding .
Finally , among the farmer representatives object of this study , the threat of sanctioning , although effective in an experimental setting , does not appear to be the mechanism at the basis of cooperation in real life.33 Given the economic nature of these producer organizations , the finding that cooperation is likely to emerge from strategic considerations , rather than altruistic motivations , may not be particularly surprising .
However , as sug- gested in the discussion of the scope conditions of the various collective action theories , I do expect a similar research design to lead to different conclusions if we were to consider other types of groups facing collective action problems .
For instance , in the context of political mobilization or high- risk activism , I expect that prosocial motivations , and group solidarity in particular , would play a more important role ; in the context of large groups , with sparse networks and rare social interactions , I expect the threat of sanctioning to be more effective than reciprocity .
In sum , this approach can be applied to different instances of public goods provision , thus allowing for an assessment of the scope conditions of our theories of collective action and social capital .
A systematic comparison of the different mechanisms that bring about cooperation should benefit the literature on collective action , which has de- veloped a rich emporium of such mechanisms but has not yet developed a systematic way to assess between them empirically .
Greater focus on the motivations and strategic considerations that favor cooperation among in- terconnected actors will also greatly advance the literature on social capital .
The latter , in fact , often relies on the general assumption that social networks and associational life have a positive impact on individual and group out- comes but rarely goes beyond the use of attitudinal measures of trust or self- reported measures of social relations and rarely makes any serious attempt at documenting the specificmechanisms throughwhich social relations bring about trusting and cooperative behavior .
This , however , is of utmost im- portance in fields such as economic development , in which social capital scholarship can inform policy interventions and therefore has the potential of affecting the life outcomes of individuals and their communities .
While for academic scholarship observing a relationship between networks and out- comes might suffice , to devise effective social interventions , it is important to know the motivations , strategies , and incentives that affect the behavior of interconnected actors in specific settings .
33Since , within each farmer cooperative , participants have been randomized to different variants of the treatment , we can exclude that the relation between BG and real-life behavior is spurious and is brought about by some unobserved factors .
However , we can not exclude that some alternative mechanism exists .
American Journal of Sociology 386 Finally , social network research could find an important ally in behav- ioral games to advance its research agenda , moving beyond demonstrations that network position and overall network structure “ matter ” to better assess the motivations , patterns of strategic interaction , and group dynamics that inform individual and group behavior .
While in the research here presented network data have been used exclusively to show the existence of a positive relationship between network position and cooperation , preexistent social relations can be incorporated in lab-in-the-field research designs , thus sys- tematically subjecting network measures of interest to experimental varia- tion .
Along with the study of network evolution , which in certain cases may be unfeasible , network-based lab-in-the-field experiments can facilitate the causal assessment of network effects in specific social settings .
APPENDIX TABLE A1 Average Treatment Effect of the Dictator Game Experiment b SE Average treatment effect ðcomember vs. covillagerÞ .
.
.
.
.
.
.880*** .17 Stranger .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.554*** .03 Male .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.158 .16 Age ðunits of 10Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.034 .05 Church attendance .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.127 .12 Education ðstd.Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.104 .07 Wealth ðstd.Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.01 .07 Intercept .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1.66*** .47ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi wðaÞ p .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.91** .42ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi wðbÞ p .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.35** .16 je .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.53*** .03 Log likelihood .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
21,697 N. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
839 NOTE.—The dependent variable is the difference in the contribution to group/village members and strangers .
The table reports results from a three-level random intercept linear regression model , in which indi- viduals are nested within producer organizations and interviewers , in order to control for group and interviewer effects .
The expression ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi wðaÞ p refers to variability between farmer groups ; ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi wðbÞ p refers to between- interviewers variability ; and je is the estimated SD of the overall error term .
* P < .05 .
** P < .01 .
*** P < .001 .
Cooperative Networks 387 T A B L E A 2 A v e r a g e T r e a t m e n t E f f e c t o f t h e P u b l i c G o o d s G a m e E x p e r i m e n t C O M M U N IC A T IO N : B A S E L IN E M O N IT O R : B A S E L IN E C O M M U N IC A T IO N : M O N IT O R ð1 Þ ð2 Þ ð1 Þ ð2 Þ ð1 Þ ð2 Þ A v er ag e tr ea tm en t ef fe ct .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
19 1 .
39 ** * 19 1 .
08 ** * 16 2 .
26 ** * 15 5 .
10 ** * 2 2 .
36 2 10 .1 1 ð1 7 .
10 Þ ð1 8 .
18 Þ ð1 8 .
94 Þ ð2 0 .
31 Þ ð2 1 .
87 Þ ð2 2 .
88 Þ R ou n d t 2 1 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
3 .
81 3 .
89 2 .
51 3 .
23 24 .6 0* ** 25 .9 5* ** ð3 .7 2Þ ð3 .9 4Þ ð3 .7 0Þ ð3 .9 4Þ ð3 .9 4Þ ð4 .1 8Þ N o. su b je ct s p er se ss io n .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
10 .0 2 10 .2 6 2 2 .
12 2 1 .
64 .7 3 2 .
25 ð8 .5 8Þ ð8 .9 7Þ ð8 .4 5Þ ð8 .9 9Þ ð1 0 .
55 Þ ð1 0 .
96 Þ P re lim in ar y co n tr ib u ti on .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.5 2* ** .5 1* ** .4 9* ** .4 9* ** .4 2* ** .4 0* ** ð.0 3Þ ð.0 3Þ ð.0 3Þ ð.0 3Þ ð.0 3Þ ð.0 3Þ M al e .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
9 .
25 2 12 .1 2 2 22 .3 5 ð2 0 .
37 Þ ð1 9 .
17 Þ ð2 3 .
03 Þ A ge ðu n it s of 10 Þ. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
10 .6 3 1 .
91 7 8 .
89 ð7 .0 9Þ ð6 .5 4Þ ð8 .1 9Þ C h u rc h at te n d an ce .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2 2 .
98 7 .
53 2 7 .
25 ð1 6 .
37 Þ ð1 4 .
76 Þ ð1 8 .
64 Þ E d u ca ti on ðst d .Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
15 .2 4* 2 .
55 9 .
44 ð8 .6 4Þ ð7 .9 6Þ ð1 0 .
57 Þ W ea lt h ðst d .Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2 17 .2 5* .8 0 2 4 .
17 ð9 .3 7Þ ð8 .9 7Þ ð1 1 .
21 Þ In te rc ep t .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
83 .8 7 41 .3 5 22 2 .
26 ** 19 6 .
29 * 29 0 .
94 ** * 28 4 .
25 ** ð8 8 .
02 Þ ð1 09 .7 9Þ ð8 7 .
03 Þ ð1 06 .4 6Þ ð1 04 .2 3Þ ð1 24 .6 1Þ ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi w ð3Þp .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.. .
.
4 .
48 ** * 4 .
52 ** * 4 .
49 ** * 4 .
55 ** * 4 .
61 ** * 4 .
63 ** * ð.1 5Þ ð.1 5Þ ð.1 5Þ ð.1 4Þ ð.1 6Þ ð.1 6Þ ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi w ð2Þp .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.. .
.
5 .
01 ** * 4 .
99 ** * 4 .
82 ** * 4 .
80 ** * 4 .
99 ** * 4 .
97 ** * ð.0 6Þ ð.0 7Þ ð.0 8Þ ð.1 0Þ ð.0 7Þ ð.0 7Þ j e .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
5 .
37 ** * 5 .
37 ** * 5 .
35 ** * 5 .
36 ** * 5 .
25 ** * 5 .
26 ** * ð.0 2Þ ð.0 3Þ ð.0 3Þ ð.0 3Þ ð.0 3Þ ð.0 3Þ L og lik el ih oo d .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2 19 ,3 73 2 17 ,4 78 2 18 ,4 84 2 16 ,7 34 2 13 ,4 92 2 12 ,1 09 N .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2 , 81 6 2 , 54 4 2 , 71 2 2 , 45 6 1 , 99 2 1 , 79 2 N O T E .— A v er ag e tr ea tm en te ff ec to fd if fe re n tv ar ia n ts of th e P P G s. T h e d ep en d en tv ar ia b le is P G G co n tr ib u ti on in ro u n d t , co ns id er in g ro u nd s 3– 6 .
T he ta b le re p or ts re su lt s fr om a se ri es of th re e- le v el ra n d om in te rc ep t m od el s , in w h ic h co n tr ib u ti on s in ro u n d t ðle v el 1Þ ar e n es te d w it h in in d iv id u al s ðle v el 2Þ , w h o th em se lv es ar e n es te d w it hi n p ro d u ce r or ga n iz at io n s ðle v el 3Þ .C om m u n ic at io n : b as el in e re fe rs to th e th e av er ag e tr ea tm en t ef fe ct s ðA T E Þo f co m m un ic at io n co m pa re d to th e b as el in e , m on it or : b as el in e re fe rs to th e th e A T E of th e el ec te d m on it or co m p ar ed to th e b as el in e , an d co m m u ni ca ti on : m on it or re fe rs to th e th e A T E of co m m u n ic at io n co m p ar ed to th e el ec te d m on it or ; ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi w ð2Þp re fe rs to b et w ee n- su b je ct s v ar ia b ili ty , ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi w ð3Þp re fe rs to v ar ia b ili ty b et w ee n fa rm er gr ou p s , an d j e is th e es ti m at ed st an d ar d d ev ia ti on of th e ov er al l er ro r te rm .
G iv en th e p an el se tu p , th e m ul ti le v el re gr es si on m od el s fu rt h er as su m e th at th e er ro rs h av e an au to re gr es si v e st ru ct u re of or d er 1 .
N u m b er s in p ar en th es es ar e S E s. * P < .0 5 .
** P < .0 1 .
** * P < .0 01 .
388 TABLE A3 Relationship between Contribution in BGs and Selling in Bulk PG BASELINE PG COMMUNICATION PG SANCTIONING ð1Þ ð2Þ ð1Þ ð2Þ ð1Þ ð2Þ PG contribution .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.09 2.09 .17* .19* .19 .16 ð.06Þ ð.06Þ ð.08Þ ð.09Þ ð.12Þ ð.12Þ Preliminary contribution .
.
.
.
2.00 2.00 2.141 2.141 2.012 .02 ð.06Þ ð.06Þ ð.07Þ ð.08Þ ð.09Þ ð.09Þ DG stranger .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.01 .02 .01 .02 .08 .07 ð.07Þ ð.07Þ ð.09Þ ð.10Þ ð.11Þ ð.11Þ DG comember/villager .
.
.
.
.
2.02 2.03 .09 .08 2.09 2.10 ð.07Þ ð.07Þ ð.09Þ ð.09Þ ð.11Þ ð.12Þ Male .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.14 .60 2.84 ð.33Þ ð.44Þ ð.57Þ Age ðunits of 10Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.03 2.301 .04 ð.12Þ ð.16Þ ð.17Þ Church attendance .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.19 2.26 .13 ð.26Þ ð.36Þ ð.37Þ Education ðstd.Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.20 2.32 .371 ð.14Þ ð.24Þ ð.22Þ Wealth ðstd.Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.01 .17 .32 ð.15Þ ð.21Þ ð.28Þ Intercept .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1.53* 1.881 .22 1.90 .49 .67 ð.37Þ ð1.05Þ ð.57Þ ð1.52Þ ð.77Þ ð1.49Þffiffiffi w p .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.16 2.12 2.12 2.024 .182 .17 ð.24Þ ð.25Þ ð.32Þ ð.31Þ ð.29Þ ð.29Þ Log likelihood .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2208 22- 04 2121 2117 2101 298 N. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
365 362 214 213 197 197 NOTE.—The dependent variable is selling in bulk vs. side selling .
Multilevel logistic re- gressions ðvarying intercept modelsÞmodel individuals nested within producer organizations .
The expression ffiffiffi w p refers to variability between producer organizations .
Numbers in pa- rentheses are SEs .
1 P < .10 .
* P < .05 .
** P < .01 .
TABLE A4 Relationship between Contribution in BGs and Attending the General Assembly PG BASELINE PG COMMUNICATION PG SANCTIONING ð1Þ ð2Þ ð1Þ ð2Þ ð1Þ ð2Þ PG contribution .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.05 2.08 .211 .17 .09 .13 ð.07Þ ð.07Þ ð.10Þ ð.10Þ ð.13Þ ð.13Þ Preliminary contribution .
.
.
.
.07 .09 2.15 2.11 .08 .06 ð.06Þ ð.07Þ ð.09Þ ð.09Þ ð.10Þ ð.11Þ DG stranger .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.06 2.04 2.12 2.11 .15 .14 ð.08Þ ð.08Þ ð.11Þ ð.12Þ ð.12Þ ð.12Þ DG comember/villager .
.
.
.
.
.00 .00 .17 .19 2.13 2.10 ð.08Þ ð.08Þ ð.12Þ ð.12Þ ð.12Þ ð.12Þ 389 TABLE A4 ( Continued ) PG BASELINE PG COMMUNICATION PG SANCTIONING ð1Þ ð2Þ ð1Þ ð2Þ ð1Þ ð2Þ Male .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1.17** .53 .38 ð.33Þ ð.50Þ ð.54Þ Age ðunits of 10Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.04 .24 2.01 ð.12Þ ð.20Þ ð.21Þ Church attendance .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.14 2.33 .24 ð.28Þ ð.48Þ ð.42Þ Education ðstd.Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.27 .55* .35 ð.14Þ ð.24Þ ð.23Þ Wealth ðstd.Þ .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.11 2.40 2.04 ð.16Þ ð.25Þ ð.28Þ Intercept .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1.55** .44 1.00 .44 1.13 .00 ð.40Þ ð1.07Þ ð.65Þ ð1.81Þ ð.77Þ ð1.60Þffiffiffi w p .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.22 2.24 .018 2.04 2.34 2.58 ð.29Þ ð.31Þ ð.33Þ ð.35Þ ð.60Þ ð.87Þ Log likelihood .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2186 2177 291 287 276 274 N. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
370 367 218 217 199 199 NOTE.—The dependent variable is attending vs. not attending the general assembly .
Mul- tilevel logistic regressions ðvarying intercept modelsÞ model individuals nested within pro- ducer organizations .
The expression ffiffiffi w p refers to variability between producer organizations .
Numbers in parentheses are SEs .
1 P < .10 .
* P < .05 .
** P < .01 .
REFERENCES Abascal , Maria .
2015 .
“ Us and Them : Black-White Relations in the Wake of Hispanic Population Growth. ” American Sociological Review 80 , in press .
Adida , Claire L. , David D. Laitin , and Marie-Anne Valfort .
2010 .
“ Identifying Barriers to Muslim Integration in France. ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107:22384–90 .
Apicella , Coren L. , Frank W. Marlowe , James H. Fowler , and Nicholas A. Christakis .
2012 .
“ Social Networks and Cooperation in Hunter-Gatherers. ” Nature 481:497–501 .
Axelrod , Robert .
1984 .
“ An Evolutionary Approach to Norms. ” American Political Sci- ence Review 80:1095–1111 .
Baldassarri , Delia .
2009 .
“ Collective Action. ” Pp .
391–418 in The Oxford Handbook of Analytical Sociology , edited by Peter Hedström and Peter Bearman .
Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Baldassarri , Delia , and Guy Grossman .
2011 .
“ Centralized Sanctioning and Legitimate Authority Promote Cooperation in Humans. ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108:11023–27 .
——— .
2013 .
“ The Effect of Group Attachment and Social Position on Prosocial Be- havior : Evidence from Lab-in-the-Field Experiments. ” PLoS ONE 8 ð3Þ : e58750 .
Banerjee , Abhijit V. , and Esther Duflo .
2010 .
Poor Economics : A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty .
New York : Public Affairs .
Barr , Abigail .
2003 .
“ Trust and Expected Trustworthiness : Experimental Evidence from Zimbabwean Villages. ” Economic Journal 113:614–30 .
American Journal of Sociology 390 Barr , Abigail , Jean Ensminger , and Jeffrey C. Johnson .
2009 .
“ Social Networks and Trust in Cross-Cultural Economic Experiments. ” Pp .
65–90 inWhom Can We Trust ?
How Groups , Networks , and Institutions Make Trust Possible , edited by Karen S. Cook , Margaret Levi , and Russell Hardin .
New York : Russell Sage Foundation .
Barr , Abigail , Magnus Lindelow , and Pieter Sernees .
2009 .
“ Corruption in Public Ser- vice Delivery : An Experimental Analysis. ” Journal of Economic Behavior and Or- ganization 72:225–39 .
Bates , Robert H. 1981 .
Markets and States in Tropical Africa : The Political Basis of Agricultural Policies .
Berkeley and Los Angeles : University of California Press .
Bearman , Peter S. 1991 .
“ Desertion as Localism : Army Unit Solidarity and Group Norms in the U.S. Civil War. ” Social Forces 70:321–42 .
——— .
1997 .
“ Generalized Exchange. ” American Journal of Sociology 102:1383–1415 .
Bingen , Jim , Alex Serrano , and Julie Howard .
2003 .
“ Linking Farmers to Markets : Different Approaches to Human Capital Development. ” Food Policy 28:405–19 .
Bohnet , Iris , and Bruno S. Frey .
1999 .
“ Social Distance and Other-Regarding Behavior in Dictator Games : Comment. ” American Economic Review 89:335–39 .
Bonacich , Phillip .
1972 .
“ Factoring and Weighting Approaches to Clique Identifica- tion. ” Journal of Mathematical Sociology 2:113–20 .
Brañas-Garza , Pablo , Ramón Cobo-Reyes , María Paz Espinoza , Natalie Jiménez , Jaromír Kovářík , and Giovanni Ponti .
2010 .
“ Altruism and Social Integration. ” Games and Economic Behavior 69:249–57 .
Burt , Ronald S. 2000 .
“ The Network Structure of Social Capital. ” Pp .
345–423 in Research in Organizational Behavior , edited by Robert I. Sutton and Barry M. Staw .
Greenwich , Conn. : JAI .
——— .
2004 .
“ Structural Holes and Good Ideas. ” American Journal of Sociology 110 : 349–99 .
——— .
2005 .
Brokerage and Closure .
New York : Oxford University Press .
Camerer , Colin .
2003 .
Behavioral Game Theory : Experiments in Strategic Interaction .
New York : Russell Sage Foundation .
Carpenter , Jeffrey P. , Amrita G. Daniere , and Lois M. Takahashi .
2004 .
“ Social Capital and Trust in Southeast Asian Cities. ” Urban Studies 41:853–74 .
Carrol , T. F. 2001 .
Social Capital , Local Capacity Building , and Poverty Reduction .
Manila : Asian Development Bank .
Chen , Yan , and Sherry Xin Li .
2009 .
“ Group Identity and Social Preferences. ” American Economic Review 99:431–57 .
Coleman , James S. 1988 .
“ Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital. ” American Journal of Sociology , supplement , Organizations and Institutions : Sociological and Economic , 94 : S95–S120 .
——— .
1989 .
“ Rationality and Society. ” Rationality and Society 1:5–9 .
——— .
1990 .
Foundations of Social Theory .
Cambridge , Mass .
: Belknap .
Collier , P. 1998 .
“ Social Capital and Poverty. ” Working paper .
World Bank Social Capital Initiative , Washington , D.C. Cook , Karen S. , Margaret Levi , and Russell Hardin , eds .
2009 .
Whom Can We Trust ?
How Groups , Networks , and Institutions Make Trust Possible .
New York : Russell Sage Foundation .
Deininger , Klaus .
1995 .
“ Collective Agricultural Production : A Solution for Transition Economies ? ” World Development 23:1317–34 .
D ’ Exelle , Ben , and Arno Riedl .
2010 .
“ Directed Generosity and Network Formation : Network Dimension Matters. ” IZA discussion paper no .
5356 .
Institute for the Study of Labor , Bonn .
Diani , Mario , and Doug McAdam .
2003 .
Social Movements and Networks .
Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Durkheim , Émile .
ð1893Þ 1984 .
The Division of Labor in Society .
NewYork : Free Press .
Cooperative Networks 391 Durlauf , S. , and M. Fafchamps .
2005 .
“ Social Capital. ” Pp .
1639–99 in Handbook of Economic Growth , edited by P. Aghion and S. Durlauf .
Amsterdam : Elsevier .
Elster , Jon .
1989 .
The Cement of Society .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
——— .
2007 .
Explaining Social Behavior : More Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
Ermisch , John , and Diego Gambetta .
2010 .
“ Do Strong Family Ties Inhibit Trust ? ” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 75:365–76 .
Fafchamps , Marcel , and Bart Minten .
1999 .
“ Relationships and Traders in Madagas- car. ” Journal of Development Studies 35:1–35 .
Farrell , Joseph , and Matthew Rabin .
1996 .
“ Cheap Talk. ” Journal of Economic Per- spectives 10:103–18 .
Fearon , James D. , Macartan Humphreys , and Jeremy M. Weinstein .
2009 .
“ Can De- velopment Aid Contribute to Social Cohesion after Civil War ?
Evidence from a Field Experiment in Post-conflict Liberia. ” American Economic Review 99:287–91 .
Fehr , Ernst , and Simon Gächter .
2002 .
“ Altruistic Punishment in Humans. ” Nature 415 : 137–40 .
Fehr , Ernst , and Herbert Gintis .
2007 .
“ Human Motivation and Social Cooperation : Experimental and Analytical Foundations. ” Annual Review of Sociology 33:43–64 .
Fehr , Ernst , and K. M. Schmidt .
1999 .
“ A Theory of Fairness , Competition , and Co- operation. ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:817–68 .
Fershtman , Chaim , and Uri Gneezy .
2001 .
“ Discrimination in a Segmented Society : An Experimental Approach. ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116:351–77 .
Fischbacher , Urs , Simon Gächter , and Ernst Fehr .
2001 .
“ Are People Conditionally Co- operative ?
Evidence from a Public Goods Experiment. ” Economics Letters 71 : 397–404 .
Foley , Michael W. , and Bob Edwards .
1996 .
“ The Paradox of Civil Society. ” Journal of Democracy 7:38–52 .
Frank , Robert H. , Thomas Gilovich , and Dennis T. Regan .
1993 .
“ The Evolution of One-Shot Cooperation : An Experiment. ” Ethology and Sociobiology 14:247–56 .
Freeman , Linton C. 1979 .
“ Centrality in Social Networks Conceptual Clarification. ” Social Networks 1:215–39 .
Fukuyama , Francis .
1995 .
Trust : The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity .
New York : Free Press .
Gambetta , Diego .
1988 .
“ Can We Trust Trust ? ” Pp .
213–37 in Trust : Making and Breaking Cooperative Relations , edited by Diego Gambetta .
Oxford : Blackwell .
——— , ed .
2005 .
Making Sense of Suicide Missions .
Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Gilligan , Michael J. , Benjamin J. Pasquale , and Cyrus D. Samii .
2014 .
“ Civil War and Social Cohesion : Lab-in-the-Field Evidence from Nepal. ” American Journal of Po- litical Science 58 ð3Þ : 604–19 .
Gintis , Herbert , Samuel Bowles , Robert Boyd , and Ernst Fehr .
2005.Moral Sentiments and Material Interests : The Foundations of Cooperation in Economic Life .
Cam- bridge , Mass .
: MIT Press .
Gittell , Ross J. , and Avis Vidal .
1998 .
Community Organizing : Building Social Capital as a Development Strategy .
Thousand Oaks , Calif. : Sage .
Goeree , Jacob K. , Margaret A. McConnell , Tiffany Mitchell , Tracey Tromp , and Leeat Yariv .
2010 .
“ The 1/d Law of Giving. ” American Economic Journal : Microeconomics 2 ð1Þ : 183–203 .
Goette , Lorenz , David Huffman , and Stephan Meier .
2006 .
“ The Impact of Group Membership on Cooperation and Norm Enforcement : Evidence Using Random As- signment to Real Social Groups. ” American Economic Review 96:212–16 .
Goette , Lorenz , David Huffman , Stephan Meier , and Matthias Sutter .
2012 .
“ Group Membership , Competition , and Altruistic versus Antisocial Punishment : Evidence from Randomly Assigned Army Groups. ” IZA discussion paper no .
5189 .
Institute for the Study of Labor , Bonn .
American Journal of Sociology 392 Gould , Roger .
1993 .
“ Collective Action and Network Structure. ” American Sociological Review 58:182–96 .
——— .
1995 .
Insurgent Identities : Class , Community , and Protest in Paris from 1848 to the Commune .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press .
Granovetter , Mark .
1978 .
“ Threshold Models of Collective Behavior. ” American Jour- nal of Sociology 83:1420–43 .
——— .
1985 .
“ Economic Action and Social Structure : The Problem of Embeddedness. ” American Journal of Sociology 91:481–510 .
Greif , Avner .
1993 .
“ Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade : The Maghribi Traders ’ Coalition. ” American Economic Review 83:525–48 .
Grootaert , Christiaan , and Thierry Van Bastelaer .
2002 .
The Role of Social Capital in Development : An Empirical Assessment .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
Grossman , Guy , and Delia Baldassarri .
2012 .
“ The Impact of Elections on Cooperation : Evidence from a Lab in the Field Experiment in Uganda. ” American Journal of Political Science 56:964–85 .
Habyarimana , James , Macartan Humphreys , Daniel N. Posner , and Jeremy M. Wein- stein .
2007 .
“ Why Does Ethnic Diversity Undermine Public Goods Provision ? ” Amer- ican Political Science Review 101:709–25 .
Hardin , Garrett .
1968 .
“ The Tragedy of the Commons. ” Science 162:1243–48 .
Heckathorn , Douglas .
1990 .
“ Collective Sanctions and Compliance Norms : A Formal Theory of GroupMediated Social Control. ” American Sociological Review 55:366–84 .
——— .
1996 .
“ The Dynamics and Dilemmas of Collective Action. ” American Socio- logical Review 61:250–77 .
Hedström , Peter S. 2005 .
Dissecting the Social : On the Principles of Analytical Soci- ology .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
Hedström , Peter S. , and Peter S. Bearman , eds .
2009 .
The Oxford Handbook of Ana- lytical Sociology .
New York : Oxford University Press .
Henrich , Joseph , Robert Boyd , Samuel Bowles , Colin Camerer , Ernst Fehr , Herbert Gintis , and Richard McElreath .
2001 .
“ In Search of Homo Economicus : Behavioral Experiments in 15 Small-Scale Societies. ” American Economic Review 91:73–78 .
Henrich , Joseph , et al .
2006 .
“ Costly Punishment across Human Societies. ” Science 312:1767–70 .
——— .
2010 .
“ Markets , Religion , Community Size , and the Evolution of Fairness and Punishment. ” Science 327:1480–84 .
Herrmann , Benedikt , Christian Thóni , and Simon Gächter .
2008 .
“ Antisocial Punish- ment across Societies. ” Science 319:1362–67 .
Hussi , Pekka .
1993 .
The Development of Cooperatives and Other Rural Organizations : The Role of the World Bank .
Washington , D.C. : World Bank .
Isham , J .
2000 .
“ The Effect of Social Capital on Technology Adoption : Evidence from Rural Tanzania. ” Working paper , Center for Institutional Reform and the Informal Sector , Washington , D.C. Jones , Dan .
2010 .
“ A WEIRD View of Human Nature Skews Psychologists ’ Studies. ” Science 328:1627 .
Karlan , Dean S. 2005 .
“ Using Experimental Economics to Measure Social Capital and Predict Financial Decisions. ” American Economic Review 95:1688–99 .
Khandker , S. 1998 .
Fighting Poverty with Microcredit : Experience in Bangladesh .
Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Kim , Hyojoung , and Peter Bearman .
1997 .
“ The Structure and Dynamics of Movement Participation. ” American Sociological Review 62:70–93 .
Konow , James .
2010 .
“ Mixed Feelings : Theories of and Evidence on Giving. ” Journal of Public Economics 94:279–97 .
Krishna , Anirudh .
2002 .
“ Enhancing Political Participation in Democracies : What Is the Role of Social Capital ? ” Comparative Political Studies 35:437–60 .
Cooperative Networks 393 Kronenberg , Clemens , and Frank Kalter .
2012 .
“ Rational Choice Theory and Empirical Research : Methodological and Theoretical Contributions in Europe. ” Annual Review of Sociology 38:73–92 .
Leider , Stephen , Markus M. Móbius , Tanya Rosenblat , and Quoc-Anh Do .
2009 .
“ Di- rected Altruism and Enforced Reciprocity in Social Networks. ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124:1815–51 .
Levitt , Steven D. , and John A .
List .
2007 .
“ What Do Laboratory Experiments Mea- suring Social Preferences Reveal about the Real World ? ” Journal of Economic Per- spectives 21:153–74 .
Lin , Nan , Karen S. Cook , and Ronald S. Burt .
2001 .
Social Capital : Theory and Re- search .
New Brunswick , N.J. : Transaction .
Lubell , Mark , and John T. Scholz .
2001 .
“ Cooperation , Reciprocity , and the Collective- Action Heuristic. ” American Journal of Political Science 45:160–78 .
Macy , Michael .
1991 .
“ Chains of Cooperation : Threshold Effects in Collective Action. ” American Sociological Review 56:730–47 .
Marwell , Gerald , and Ruth E. Ames .
1979 .
“ Experiments on the Provision of Public Goods : Resources , Interest , Group Size , and the Free-Rider Problem. ” American Journal of Sociology 84:1335–60 .
Marwell , Gerald , and Pamela Oliver .
1993 .
The Critical Mass in Collective Action : A Microsocial Theory .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
McAdam , Doug .
1986 .
“ Recruitment to High-Risk Activism : The Case of Freedom Summer. ” American Journal of Sociology 92:253–71 .
Merton , Robert K. 1957 .
Social Theory and Social Structure .
New York : Free Press .
Molm , Linda D. 2010 .
“ The Structure of Reciprocity. ” Social Psychology Quarterly 73 : 119–31 .
Narayan-Parker , Deepa .
2002 .
Empowerment and Poverty Reduction : A Sourcebook .
Washington , D.C. : World Bank .
Nee , Victor , and Sonja Opper .
2012 .
Capitalism from Below : Markets and Institutional Change in China .
Cambridge , Mass .
: Harvard University Press .
Nowak , Martin A. , and Karl Sigmund .
2005 .
“ Evolution of Indirect Reciprocity. ” Na- ture 437:1291–98 .
Obershall , Anthony .
1973 .
Social Conflict and Social Movements .
New York : Prentice Hall .
Olson , Mancur .
1965 .
The Logic of Collective Action : Public Goods and the Theory of Groups .
Cambridge , Mass .
: Harvard University Press .
Opp , Karl-Dieter .
1999 .
“ Contending Conceptions of the Theory of Rational Action. ” Journal of Theoretical Politics 11:171–202 .
Ostrom , Elinor .
1990 .
Governing the Commons : The Evolution of Institutions for Col- lective Action .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
——— .
1998 .
“ A Behavioral Approach to the Rational Choice Theory of Collective Action : Presidential Address. ” American Political Science Review 92:1–22 .
——— .
2000 .
“ Collective Action and the Evolution of Social Norms. ” Journal of Eco- nomic Perspectives 14:137–58 .
——— .
2005 .
Understanding Institutional Diversity .
Princeton , N.J. : Princeton Uni- versity Press .
——— .
2010 .
“ Revising Theory in Light of Experimental Findings. ” Journal of Eco- nomic Behavior and Organization 73:68–72 .
Ostrom , Elinor , James Walker , and Roy Gardner .
1992 .
“ Covenants With and Without a Sword : Self-Governance Is Possible. ” American Political Science Review 86:404–17 .
Polanyi , Karl .
1944 .
The Great Transformation .
New York : Farrar & Rinehart .
Portes , Alejandro .
1998 .
“ Social Capital : Its Origins and Applications in Modern Soci- ology. ” Annual Review of Sociology 24:1–24 .
American Journal of Sociology 394 Poteete , Amy R. , Marco A. Janssen , and Elinor Ostrom .
2010 .
Working Together : Col- lective Action , the Commons , and Multiple Methods in Practice .
Princeton , N.J. : Princeton University Press .
Putnam , Robert D. 2000 .
Bowling Alone : The Collapse and Revival of American Com- munity .
New York : Simon & Schuster .
Ruttan , Lore .
2008 .
“ Economic Heterogeneity and the Commons : Effects on Collective Action and Collective Goods Provisioning. ” World Development 36:969–85 .
Scholz , John T. , and Wayne B .
Gray .
1997 .
“ Can Government Facilitate Cooperation ?
An Informational Model of OSHA Enforcement. ” American Journal of Political Science 41:693–717 .
Sigmund , Karl .
2007 .
“ Punish or Perish ?
Retaliation and Collaboration amongHumans. ” Trends in Ecology and Evolution 22:593–600 .
Sobel , Joel .
2002 .
“ Can We Trust Social Capital ? ” Journal of Economic Literature 40:139–54 .
Staatz , John M. 1987 .
“ Recent Developments in the Theory of Agricultural Coopera- tion. ” Journal of Agricultural Cooperation 2:74–95 .
Stockbridge , Michael , Andrew Dorward , Jonathan Kydd , Jamie Morrison , and Nigel Poole .
2003 .
“ Farmer Organization for Market Access : An International Review. ” UK Department of Agricultural Sciences , London .
Tajfel , Henry , and John Turner .
1979 .
“ An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conflict. ” Pp .
33–47 in The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations , edited by William G. Austin and Stephen Worchel .
Monterey , Calif. : Brooks/Cole .
Trivers , Robert L. 1971 .
“ The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism. ” Quarterly Review of Biology 46:35–57 .
Uzzi , Brian .
1996 .
“ The Sources and Consequences of Embeddedness for the Economic Performance of Organizations : The Network Effect. ” American Sociological Review 61:674–98 .
Watts , Duncan J. , and Peter S. Dodds .
2007 .
“ Influentials , Networks , and Public Opin- ion Formation. ” Journal of Consumer Research 34:441–58 .
Weber , Max .
ð1905Þ 1930 .
The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism .
NewYork : Routledge .
Whitt , Sam , and Rick K. Wilson .
2007 .
“ The Dictator Game , Fairness and Ethnicity in Postwar Bosnia. ” American Journal of Political Science 51:655–68 .
Willer , Robb .
2009 .
“ Groups Reward Individual Sacrifice : The Status Solution to the Collective Action Problem. ” American Sociological Review 74:23–43 .
Woolcock , M. 1998 .
“ Social Capital and Economic Development : Toward a Theoretical Synthesis and Policy Framework. ” Theory and Society 27:151–208 .
Yamagishi , Toshio .
2011 .
Trust : The Evolutionary Game of Mind and Society .
Tokyo : Springer .
Yamagishi , Toshio , and Karen S. Cook .
1993 .
“ Generalized Exchange and Social Di- lemmas. ” Social Psychology Quarterly 56:235–48 .
Yamagishi , Toshio , Karen S. Cook , andMotoki Watabe .
1998 .
“ Uncertainty , Trust , and Commitment Formation in the United States and Japan. ” American Journal of So- ciology 104:165–94 .
Yunus , M. 1998 .
Banker of the Poor .
Dhaka : University Press Limited .
Cooperative Networks 395 Copyright of American Journal of Sociology is the property of University of Chicago Press and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder 's express written permission .
However , users may print , download , or email articles for individual use .
