Chuang_JournEnvPsych_2016_Bj5j.pdf
a4XNLSxjtksHwh.pF0pvBuLJs594-Chuang_JournEnvPsych_2016_Bj5j.pdf.plain.html

lable at ScienceDirect Journal of Environmental Psychology 46 ( 2016 ) 96e105Contents lists avaiJournal of Environmental Psychology journal homepage : www.elsevier .com/locate/ jepInterdependent orientations increase pro-environmental preferences when facing self-interest conflicts : The mediating role of self-control Yating Chuang , Xiaofei Xie* , Chang Liu Department of Psychology , Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health , Peking University , Beijing , 100871 , Chinaa r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 17 February 2015 Received in revised form 14 March 2016 Accepted 2 April 2016 Available online 4 April 2016 Keywords : Pro-environment Self-interest Self-construal Self-control* Corresponding author .
E-mail address : xiaofei @ pku.edu.cn ( X. Xie ) .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2016.04.001 0272-4944/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.a b s t r a c t The conflict between self-interested and pro-environmental choices induces psychological barriers to environmental protection .
We propose that self-construals can influence the preference in such con- flicting choices and that self-control plays a mediating role .
The current research offered conflicting choices related to green consumption .
Participants were asked to choose between buying eco-friendly ( pro-environment ) and cheaper ( self-interest ) products .
Individuals with both chronic and primed interdependence but not independence had an increased likelihood of selecting the pro-environmental option ( Studies 1a and 1b ) .
In Study 2 , interdependent individuals exhibited better self-control in a Stroop task and were willing to pay more for a pro-environmental choice than independent individuals .
In Study 3 , we found that the effect was diminished in an ego-depletion condition .
Our findings indicate that individuals with interdependence favor pro-environmental choices compared with those with in- dependence because interdependent individuals are better at can exerting self-control to restrain their self-interested desires .
© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.1 .
Introduction China 's rapid growth is causing environmental deterioration and arousing great apprehension among the general public .
An environmental awareness survey of the Chinese public ( CEAP , 2007 ) showed that Chinese citizens ' knowledge and awareness of environmental protection have improved significantly over the last decade ; however , the results related to environmental behaviors such as classifying waste and recycling that require people to actively engage revealed a decreasing trend .
Identifying the factors that shape pro-environmental behavior is a complex process .
Individuals ' pro-environmental tendencies are influenced by numerous factors that include childhood experience , education , personality , social norms and other personal and social elements ( e.g. , Gifford & Nilsson , 2014 ; Kollmuss & Agyeman , 2002 ) .
Prior research suggests that people are more likely to act pro-environmentally if they also think that such actions will have positive consequences for themselves ( Evans et al. , 2013 ) .
However , not all pro-environmental actions align with self-interest ( e.g. , De Young , 1996 ; Lindenberg & Steg , 2007 ) .
For example , eco-friendlysprays can be more expensive than conventional sprays , and nonorganic food is cheaper than organic food ; the less-expensive options in these examples provide individuals with short-term financial advantages .
China is the fastest growing developing country in the world .
The Chinese government solved the starva- tion problem only approximately 20e30 years ago .
However , the economic conditions of the majority of people in China have only slightly improved ; therefore , they spend their money frugally .
Although people realize that environmental protection is impor- tant , given the economic conditions , they likely feel internal con- flict between pro-environmental and self-interested ( e.g. , saving money ) sentiments when faced with potentially pro- environmental decisions .
The current research sought to elucidate China 's environmental dilemma between self-interest ( particularly economic benefits ) and environmental protection .
We are interested in the actions of individuals facing such conflicts .
Consistent with the concept that self-construal can have an important effect on environmental concerns ( Arnocky , Stroink , & DeCicco , 2007 ) , the present research was designed to explore how self-construal affects preference during choices in which conflicts between pro-environmental and self-interested sentiments are present .
To extend previous research , we propose that self-control is a mediator .
Specifically , individuals with interdependent orientations value harmonious Y. Chuang et al .
/ Journal of Environmental Psychology 46 ( 2016 ) 96e105 97relations with others and social norms and usually suppress selfish desires relative to those with independent orientations ( Cross , Hardin , & Gercek-Swing , 2011 ) .
Thus , self-control might be a mediating mechanism that helps interdependent individuals restrict self-interested impulses and favormore pro-environmental choices compared with independent individuals .
1.1 .
Conflict between self-interested and pro-environmental choices Pro-environmental behaviors occur when one 's actions are consciously designed to minimize negative influences on the natural world ( Kollmuss & Agyeman , 2002 ) such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions and waste production .
Pro- environmental behaviors are also considered prosocial , altruistic , and moral behaviors ( Griskevicius , Tybur , & Van den Bergh , 2010 ; Thøgersen , 1996 ) that can provide long-term sustainable benefits for the environment and society .
Anti-environmental behaviors often imply acting according to personal interests , while many pro-environmental behaviors require people to inhibit egoistic desires to benefit the natural world ( e.g. , Dawes , 1980 ; Samuelson , 1990 ) .
From a consumer behavior perspective , green consumption contributes positively to environment protection but usually re- quires customers to spend more than conventional consumption patterns .
For example , a gas-electric vehicle costs more than a conventional car , and eco-friendly batteries cost more than com- mon batteries .
Most people might want to savemoney in the short- term and thus choose non-eco-friendly products .
In addition to the monetary costs , when pro-environmental choices require personal time and effort , the barriers to pro-environmental behavior in- crease .
For example , recycling and rubbish collection are both important processes for protecting the natural environment , but not all people take such actions .
Some might consider such actions to be time- and effort-wasting behaviors .
When individuals encounter conflicting pro-environmental and self-interested goals , they must intentionally favor the pro- environmental goals to achieve pro-environmental behavior .
For example , when the weather is very hot in the summer , people 's self-interest might urge them to set the thermostat to 16 C for comfort , whereas their pro-environmental sentiments might insist that 28 C would be more appropriate because that setting reduces carbon emissions .
When these two goals are in conflict , the goal is to persuade people to imbue the pro-environmental action with more weight and adopt the pro-environmental choice .
Two approaches to solving such a conflict can be considered : to increase individuals ' environmental concerns or decrease their self- interested desires .
However , based on a CEAP report ( 2007 ) , increasing positive environmental awareness seems to be insuffi- cient to cause people to act pro-environmentally in China .
Similarly , many studies have observed weak correlations between environ- mental attitudes and conservation behaviors ( Gagnon Thompson & Barton , 1994 ) .
These findings indicate that emphasizing positive environmental awareness seems to be insufficient to cause people to act pro-environmentally .
Thus , we suggest that inhibiting egoistic desire is an alternative method to induce pro- environmental behaviors .
We propose that individuals ' self- construals in terms of independence and interdependence affect their preferences in such choices .
1.2 .
Self-construal affects pro-environmental tendencies The concept of self-construal was introduced by Markus and Kitayama ( 1991 ) , who distinguished two typical types of self- cognition in terms of the relationships between individuals and others .
Individuals with independent orientations considerthemselves to be separate and unique from others ; their behav- iors arise from internal attributes ( e.g. , traits , abilities , and values ) .
In contrast , individuals with interdependent orientations consider themselves to be connected with others ; their actions are regulated by contextual factors and intended to maintain harmony with others ( Cross et al. , 2011 ) .
In addition to the cul- tural aspects , Singelis ( 1994 ) noted that these two self-construals are both basic human needs that coexist in individuals and can be measured .
Similarly , Trafimow , Triandis , and Goto ( 1991 ) illus- trated that private ( independent ) and collective ( interdependent ) self-cognitions are stored separatelydin different memory spacesdwithin a single person and that these cognitions are retrieved in a manner that depends on one 's cultural background , priming procedures , and situational cues ( e.g. , Aaker & Lee , 2001 ; Brewer & Gardner , 1996 ; Lindenberg & Steg , 2007 ; Trafimow et al. , 1991 ) .
Research in cultural domains has shown that people with interdependent orientations place greater emphasis on social happiness than on personal delight ( Kitayama , Park , Sevincer , Karasawa , & Uskul , 2009 ) and exhibit less self-interest ( Kitayama & Park , 2013 ) compared with those who have independent ori- entations .
Additionally , studies that have employed experimental manipulations of participants ' self-construals have obtained similar results .
Howard , Gardner , and Thompson ( 2007 ) explored how self-construal determines the use of power .
These authors found that individuals who had been primed to be independent were more likely to favor their own interests during disputes with low-powered opponents than those who had been primed to be interdependent ( Howard et al. , 2007 ) .
Similarly , Gardner , Gabriel , and Lee ( 1999 ) found that people primed to be independent were likely to be less considerate of others ' needs than partici- pants who had been primed to be interdependent , regardless of their cultural backgrounds .
These converging lines of evidence indicate that people with independent orientations are more likely to exhibit self-beneficial actions and that those with interdepen- dent orientations are more connected to the social welfare of others .
Interdependent or independent orientations also influence pro- environmental preferences .
Past research has shown that in- dividuals with interdependent orientations are inclined to express greater levels of environmental concern than are those with inde- pendent orientations ( e.g. , Arnocky et al. , 2007 ) .
Arnocky et al .
( 2007 ) measured participants ' self-construal orientations and uti- lized an environmental concern scale and a questionnaire involving resource dilemma situations to examine self-construal in associa- tion with environmental engagement .
These authors found that independent orientations predicted egoistic environmental con- cerns and resource competition , whereas interdependent orienta- tions were related to cooperation with others in resource sharing .
This result may also indicate that self-construal can influence conflicting preferences between pro-environment and self-interest because interdependent individuals may place more emphasis on social norms when conducting their choices than independent individuals .
Hypothesis 1 : Self-construals influence individuals ’ inclinations regarding conflicting pro-environmental and self-interested op- tions .
Individuals with interdependent orientations are more in- clined toward pro-environmental options than those with independent orientations , and this difference is independent of whether the orientation is chronic ( as measured with a scale ) or activated by situational cues ( i.e. , experimental priming ) .
In addition , we investigate the possible mechanisms that in- fluence such conflicting preferences between interdependent and independent individuals , focusing particularly on the ability for self-control .
Y. Chuang et al .
/ Journal of Environmental Psychology 46 ( 2016 ) 96e105981.3 .
Self-control and pro-environmental behavior Self-control is the capacity to regulate one 's instinctive re- sponses or actions in accordance with the requirements of oneself or the external world ( Baumeister & Heatherton,1996 ) .
Self-control can inhibit natural impulses ( e.g. , self-interested tendencies ) and help people pursue long-term benefits ( Baumeister , Vohs , & Tice , 2007 ; Milkman , Rogers , & Bazerman , 2008 ) .
People in states of low self-control are more likely to be dominated by the impulsive system , which is associated with behavior that is based on the evolutionary history of the organism .
In contrast , people in states of high self-control are more likely to be dominated by the reflective system , which serves regulatory goals that control the impulsive system ( Hofmann , Friese , & Strack , 2009 ; Strack & Deutsch , 2004 ) .
People with high levels of self-control adopt deliberative thinking over instinctual responses , a behavior that helps them achieve long-term goals .
However , according to the strength model of self-control ( Baumeister et al. , 2007 ; Muraven & Baumeister , 2000 ) , self- control is a limited inner resource that resembles a human mus- cle .
Exerting self-control in any domain can cause ego-depletion , which is similar to a state of mental fatigue state and results in reduced performance levels on subsequent tasks that require self- control .
Abundant evidence indicates that it is easy to reduce an individual 's self-control through emotional regulation , thought control , and temptation resistance ( e.g. , Muraven & Baumeister , 2000 ; Muraven , Tice , & Baumeister , 1998 ) or by applying an extreme cognitive load ( Shiv & Fedorikhin , 1999 ) .
For example , individuals in states of high cognitive load are more likely to choose an option that meets their immediate desire ( e.g. , chocolate cake ) , whereas those in states of low cognitive load tend to choose a healthier option ( e.g. , a fruit salad ) .
Self-control is also an important factor that determines a per- son 's engagement in pro-environmental behavior .
Griskevicius et al .
( 2010 ) stated that pro-environmental behaviors are a type of prosocial behavior , and Martinsson , Myrseth , and Wollbrant ( 2012 ) found that the trait of self-control is positively correlated with pro-social behavior .
Specifically , people exert self-control to restrain their instinctual desires ( e.g. , saving money ) when they consider the long-term benefits to the natural world .
Therefore , faced with decision-making conflicts between pro-environmental and self-interested goals , individuals with low levels of self- control might prioritize personal goals and follow their natural responses .
Consequently , the self-interested goals of such in- dividuals outweigh their pro-environmental goals , which inhibits their ability to make choices that favor environmental protection .
However , people with high levels of self-control are more likely to follow social norms and adopt the appropriate behavior .
Thus , self- control is an important factor that helps people select pro- environmental goals .
Moreover , independent and interdependent self-construals are indicative of different levels of self-control .
1.4 .
Self-construal and self-control Previous research has shown that individuals with interdepen- dent orientations perform better on tasks based on both cultural and chronic measurements that require self-control compared with individuals with independent orientations .
Seeley and Gardner ( 2003 ) clustered collective cultural background , interdependent beliefs , and other-directed self-monitoring into a measure called social orientation .
They found that participants with strong social orientationwere less depleted after exerting self-control than those with weak social orientation .
There are two profound reasons that people with interdepen- dent orientations perform better in terms of self-control comparedwith those who have independent orientations .
First , according to Seeley and Gardner ( 2003 ) , people who possess strong social focus ( e.g. , interdependent beliefs ) exhibit greater motivation and prac- tice more self-control in daily social interactions .
Research has shown that motivation ( Muraven , 1998 ) and practice ( Muraven , Baumeister , & Tice , 1999 ) can improve self-regulatory ability .
Sec- ond , Masuda and Nisbett ( 2001 ) suggested that people with interdependent orientations exhibit more holistic attention , which involves the use of abstract , general terms ( i.e. , high-level con- struals ) and not concrete , detailed terms ( i.e. , low-level construals ) ; in other words , such individuals pay more attention to context .
Additionally , Fujita , Trope , Liberman , and Levin-Sagi ( 2006 ) demonstrated that participants who activate high-level construals exhibit more effective self-control than do those who activate low- level construals because interdependent orientations might possibly result in better self-control via high-level construal mindsets .
These two lines of reasoning demonstrate that interde- pendent people are less depleted than independent people after exerting self-control .
Therefore , we propose that when faced with conflicts between pro-environmental and self-interested choices , the difference in self-control between independent and interdependent orientations is a mediating factor that influences individuals ' tendencies to make self-interested versus pro-environmental choices .
Hypothesis 2 : Self-control is a mediating factor when making self-interested versus pro-environmental choices .
Specifically , participants with interdependent orientations have greater self- control resources than those with independent orientations .
Thus , interdependent people can restrain their self-interested de- sires and give greater consideration to pro-environmental options .
2 .
Overview of the research The present study intended to apply experimental methods to verify whether self-construals influence preferences for conflicting pro-environmental and self-interested options .
This paper used scenarios related to green consumption to design opposing choices , specifically conflicts between pro-environmental benefits ( e.g. , we should favor eco-friendly products even at higher prices ) and self- interested benefits ( e.g. , favor lower prices over more expensive eco-friendly products ) .
The scenarios used in this study are typical examples of the environmental dilemmas faced by Chinese people .
Chinese people know that they should choose more eco-friendly products , but they are usually unwilling to pay more money because that would harm their self-interest .
When participants select the former option , they are considered to be pro- environment rather than self-interested , while when they select the latter option , they are assumed to be more self-interested than pro-environment .
Our first experiment examined whether individuals who were dominantly interdependent and those who were dominantly in- dependent exhibited distinct inclinations regarding the conflicting options using a scale measurement ( Study 1a ) and experimentally induced priming ( Study 1b ) .
Study 2 examined whether self- control is a mediating factor using the Stroop response latency as an implicit measure .
Finally , we depleted the self-control resources of the participants in Study 3 and predicted that the effect of distinct inclination would be reduced in the ego-depleted condi- tion ; we used a moderation technique to deplete participants ' self- control resources to prove that self-control is a crucial mediator .
2.1 .
Studies 1a and 1b Studies 1a and 1b aimed to explore whether people in different states of interdependence or independence exhibit different choice Y. Chuang et al .
/ Journal of Environmental Psychology 46 ( 2016 ) 96e105 99tendencies when they encounter a conflict between pro- environmental and self-interested goals .
In Study 1a , we used a Chinese modified version of Singelis ' self-construal scales ( Wang , Yuan , & Xu , 2008 ) to measure participants ' chronic self- construals in a Chinese context .
In Study 1b , we used a classic laboratory method designed by Trafimow et al .
( 1991 ) to activate participants ' interdependence or independence .
We hypothesized that the participants who were dominantly interdependent ( whether chronically or due to priming ) would be more inclined toward the pro-environmental options than those who were dominantly independent .
2.1.1 .
Study 1a 2.1.1.1 .
Method .
Participants .
A total of 79 students ( 45 males , 34 females , Mage ¼ 22.86 , SD ¼ 2.39 ) from Peking University and Bei- jing Forestry University participated in the study through online or paper-based surveys .
Materials and procedure .
The participants completed a self- construal scale ( Chinese version ) ( Wang et al. , 2008 ) that was translated from the self-construal scale of Singelis ( 1994 ) and has demonstrated high reliability and validity .
The scale consisted of 12 items related to independence ( a¼ 0.68 ; e.g. , “ I enjoy being unique and different from others in many respects ” ) and 12 items related to interdependence ( a ¼ 0.60 ; e.g. , “ It is important for me to maintain harmony within my group ” ) .
The items were rated on a 7- point scale , ranging from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 7 ( strongly agree ) .
Next , the participants were instructed to read the following passage : “ Based on eco-friendly and economic considerations , the school cafeterias decide to provide two types of takeout boxes .
There are no apparent differences in the designs of the two types ; however , the type A takeout boxes are more biodegradable than are the type B boxes ; thus , the type A boxes are more expensive than the type B boxes .
The type A boxes are one yuan , and the type B boxes are 0.5 yuan. ” After reading this passage , we asked the following two contextual questions to confirm that the participants completely understood the scenario : “ Which type of takeout box is more eco- friendly ? ” and “ Which type of takeout box is less expensive ? ” Next , we asked the main question , “ If you needed a takeout box , which one would you prefer to buy ? ” and the participants replied on a 7- point scale ( 1¼ definitely choose type A , 7¼ definitely choose type B ) .
In this scenario , type A was more biodegradable but more expen- sive , whereas type B was more economical but less eco-friendly .
The participants who favored type A were considered more pro- environmental , and those who favored type B were considered more self-interested .
Then , we asked two questions as control variables .
The first measured the frequencies of the participants ' use of takeout boxes ( 1 ¼ never , 5 ¼ always ) , and the second measured the participants ' sense of environmental protection self-efficacy ( “ How much effect do you believe that your personal environmental behavior has on improving the environment ? ” ; 1 ¼ no effect , and 7 ¼ strong effect ) .
We measured “ environmental protection self-efficacy ” as a control variable .
Prior research has indicated that people are less likely to adopt pro-environmental behaviors they believe that their actions make no contribution to environmental protection ( e.g. , Lee & Holden , 1999 ; Lubell , 2002 ) ; therefore , this phenomenon can be considered as a sense of self-efficacy in eco-protection ( Gifford & Nilsson , 2014 ) .
Our participants primarily had backgrounds in higher education and had sufficient environmental knowledge to understand the environmental consequences of their actions .
Therefore , in addition to their habits , we believed that their sense of self-efficacy in eco-protection would influence their environment- related decisions .
Subsequently , the participants were asked toanswer demographic questions .
2.1.1.2 .
Results .
The resulting self-construal scale scores were used to separately calculate the sums of the independence and inter- dependence subscales , and the independence score minus the interdependence score was taken as the final score .
Higher scores indicated greater independence , and lower scores indicated greater interdependence .
As suggested by Spector and Brannick ( 2011 ) , we first examined the hypothesis conducting a regression model that did not include any control variables and then assessed how adding the control variables would affect our findings .
First , we conducted a regression analysis using the self-construal scores as the predictor and the choice between A ( the pro-environmental option ) and B ( the self- interested option ) as the dependent variable .
The results revealed a significant relationship , F ( 1,77 ) ¼ 6.67 , p ¼ 0.01 , R2adj ¼ 0.07 .
Self- construal scores indicative of interdependence were associated with the pro-environmental option , b¼ 0.28 , t ( 77 ) ¼ 2.58 , p < 0.05 .
Finally , analyses were rerunwith age , sex , takeout box type , and sense of self-efficacy in eco-protection as the control variables in level one of the regression model , and we added self-construal score in level two , Only the sense of self-efficacy in eco- protection had a significant effect ( b ¼ 0.24 , t ( 73 ) ¼ 2.06 , p < 0.05 ) on the participants ' choices ; other choices exerted no effect .
The results still remained significant , F ( 1,72 ) ¼ 2.35 , p < 0.05 , R2adj ¼ 0.07 .
Self-construal was still significant in predicting the conflicting options , b ¼ 0.27 , t ( 72 ) ¼ 2.41 , p < 0.05 .
Thus , our results indicated that the participants with chronically interdependent orientations were more likely to choose the pro- environmental option when faced with conflicting self-interested and pro-environmental options compared with the participants who had chronically independent orientations .
2.1.2 .
Study 1b 2.1.2.1 .
Method .
Participants and Procedure .
Fifty-four students ( 17 males , 37 females , Mage ¼ 22.8 , SD ¼ 3.09 ) participated in this study by completing an online questionnaire .
The first step was to activate their independent or interdependent orientations .
We used the priming task developed by Trafimow et al .
( 1991 ) inwhich participants were required to read either an independent or an interdependent story .
The story described a warrior who had to pick a general to aid the king .
In the independent condition , the warrior sent the most talented general to the king with the goal of obtaining a reward for himself .
In the interdependent condition , the warrior chose a member of his own family based on the consideration that the king would be indebted to his family .
Next , the participants were given two minutes to write about either the differences ( priming independence ) or the similarities ( priming interdependence ) between themselves and their family and friends .
To prove that the self-construal manipulation used throughout the following studies selected activated independence or interde- pendence , we recruited thirty-eight students ( 18males , 20 females , Mage ¼ 23.34 , SD ¼ 3.22 , 19 of whom were primed with indepen- dence ) who did not participate in study 1b to participate in a pre- test .
These participants were asked to describe themselves by completing a modified 10-item version of the Twenty Statements Test ( TST ) ( Kuhn & McPartland , 1954 ) .
The test was completed within three minutes of finishing the priming procedure .
The TST coding procedure was taught to two independent coders , who had psychology backgrounds .
The rules followed prior research ( e.g. , Gardner et al. , 1999 ) : sentences that referred to personal traits , attitudes ( e.g. , I am intelligent ) , or behaviors would be coded as independence , whereas sentences that referred to re- lationships or groupmembers ( e.g. , I am a student ) would be coded Y. Chuang et al .
/ Journal of Environmental Psychology 46 ( 2016 ) 96e105100as interdependence .
The final scorewas calculated as the average of the two independent coders ' scores ( interrater reliability ¼ 0.97 ) .
The two priming types were analyzed by independent t-test , t ( 36 ) ¼ 2.06 , p < 0.05 , Cohen 's d ¼ 0.69 .
The analysis revealed that the priming manipulation was successful .
The participants in the pretest whowere primedwith independence described themselves with a greater proportion of independent self-construals than those who were primed with interdependence ( MInd ¼ 6.18 , SD ¼ 3.89 ; MInter ¼ 3.76 , SD ¼ 3.33 ) .
These findings indicated that the self-construal manipulation used in the following studies could successfully prime participants ' interdependent or independent orientations .
After the priming procedure , the participants in Study 1b read the following scenario and answered a question : “ You need to buy a car and have a budget of 150e200 thousand yuan ( RMB ) .
You go to a “ vehicle house ” to browse and compare relevant information .
According to your requirements , the sales- person recommends cars A and B .
There are no considerable dif- ferences between the two cars in terms of appearance , capacity , fuel consumption , and so on ; the only difference is that car A has a new exhaust gas purifier installed that can increase the purity of its emission by 8 % ; thus , car A is 10 thousand yuan more expensive than car B. ” Although car A ( pro-environmental option ) was more eco- friendly than car B ( self-interested option ) , car B was less expen- sive than car A .
The participants who chose car B were considered to prioritize self-benefits , whereas those who chose car A were considered to prioritize long-term environmental benefits .
Similar to Study 1a , we asked two contextual questions to confirm that the participants understood the scenario ( “ Which car is more eco- friendly ? ” and “ Which car is less expensive ? ” ) .
Next , we asked the main question , “ If you decide to buy a car , which one would you prefer to buy ? ” , and the participants answered on a 7-point scale ( 1 ¼ definitely choose car A , 7 ¼ definitely choose car B ) .
Finally , we asked control questions to measure the participants ' sense of self- efficacy in eco-protection , as described for Study 1a.2.1.2.2 .
Results .
A total of 28 participants were primed with inde- pendence , and 26 participants were primed with interdependence .
First , we conducted a one-way ANOVA without control variables .
The self-construals were found to have a significant effect on car selection , F ( 1,52 ) ¼ 5.67 , p < 0.05 , h2 ¼ 0.10 ( Cohen 's d ¼ 0.67 ) .
The participants who were primed with interdependence ( M ¼ 2.58 , SD ¼ 1.07 ) were more inclined to select car A than were those who were primed with independence ( M ¼ 3.46 , SD ¼ 1.60 ; see Fig .
1 ) .
Then , we conducted an ANCOVA to control for the sense of self-1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 interdependece independence cost-saving eco-friendly Fig .
1 .
Mean choices of car A ( eco-friendly ) vs. car B ( cost-saving ) following interde- pendence or independence priming in Study 1b.efficacy in eco-protection , which also exhibited a significant effect on the selection , F ( 1,51 ) ¼ 11.48 , p < 0.01 , h2 ¼ 0.18 ( Cohen 's d¼ 0.94 ) ; however , self-construals still reveal a significant effect on car decision , F ( 1,51 ) ¼ 8.02 , p < 0.01 , h2 ¼ 0.14 ( Cohen 's d ¼ 0.80 ) .
2.1.3 .
Discussion The results of Studies 1a and 1b initially supported Hypothesis one , which stated that chronic ( 1a ) and experimentally induced ( 1b ) self-construals affected decisions in conditions of conflict be- tween pro-environmental and self-interested goals .
We wanted to determine whether the participants who were dominantly inter- dependent , either chronically or due to experimental manipulation , would choose the pro-environmental options more frequently than would those dominated by independence .
2.2 .
Study 2 : mediator of self-control Study 2 aimed to verify the mediating role of self-control on the effects of the different self-construals on decision-making in con- ditions of pro-environmental conflict with self-interest .
Measure- ments were performed using the Stroop task ( Stroop , 1935 ) , which requires self-control to override the urge to react to the indicated color and not the semantic meaning of the presented word .
The response latencies of this test have been widely used as a measure of self-control ( e.g. , Gailliot et al. , 2007 ) .
We used a similar scenario as presented in Study 1b , but the ‘ willingness to pay ’ was used as the dependent variable in this study .
If the participants agreed to pay a higher price , they were considered to be more inclined to choose the pro-environmental option than the self-interested op- tion .
In contrast , participants who chose to pay less were consid- ered to be more inclined to choose the self-interested option .
2.2.1 .
Method Participants .
One hundred and twenty-one university students were recruited through a campus BBS , which cost 10 yuan ( RMB ) .
Three participants were excluded from the analysis ; one partici- pant failed to finish the procedure , and the Stroop task response times of two participants were considered to be outliers .
Data from 118 participants ( 57 males , 55 females , Mage ¼ 22.59 , SD ¼ 2.82 ; six participants miscoded their age and gender ) were used for the subsequent analyses .
Procedure .
The participants came to the laboratory individually .
They were required to complete the color-word Stroop task on a computer .
This task , which consisted of 24 trials , served as the control for the baseline differences in self-control resources .
The design involved identifying the color of a Chinese character ( red , green , blue , or black ) .
The participants were instructed to react to the ink color and to ignore the semantic meaning of the stimulus .
The inter-stimulus interval was 200 ms , and various colors and words were displayed randomly .
In the incongruent trials , the se- mantic meaning of the word was not related to the presented color , whereas in the congruent trials , the word and the color were the same .
After completing the baseline Stroop task , the participants were randomly grouped into interdependent or independent priming groups .
The priming procedure was identical to that used in Study 1b ( i.e. , the participants read a story and wrote down similarities or differences between themselves and their family and friends ) .
Next , the participants immediately completed 96 more trials of the Stroop task .
The Stroop interference scores of these latter trials were used as a primary measure of the participants ' self-control .
Subsequently , the participants read a scenario similar to that presented in Study 1b but with some modifications .
In this phase , we asked the participants the following question : “ You need to buy a car with a budget of 200e250 thousand yuan ( RMB ) .
Car B has a new exhaust gas purifier installed that can increase the purity Y. Chuang et al .
/ Journal of Environmental Psychology 46 ( 2016 ) 96e105 101of the emissions by 8 % compared with car A ( 210 thousand ) .
How much money are you willing to pay for car B ? ” The participants wrote their answers on the blank lines provided .
If the participants provided a higher price for car B , they were considered to be more inclined toward the pro-environmental option , while those who offered a lower price were considered to be more inclined toward the self-interested option .
Similarly , we supposed that the participants ' average monthly spending and sense of self-efficacy in eco-protection would influ- ence their decisions .
Therefore , we asked the participants to answer questions about self-efficacy in eco-protection and average monthly spending at the end of the procedure .
2.2.2 .
Results The independent and interdependent priming groups were composed of 59 participants each .
First , we conducted one-way ANOVA without any control variables .
The self-construals signifi- cantly affected the amount offered for the pro-environmental op- tion .
F ( 1,116 ) ¼ 4.26 , p < 0.05 , h2 ¼ 0.04 ( Cohen 's d ¼ 0.41 ) .
The interdependence-primed participants ( M ¼ 1.61 , SD ¼ 1.04 , unit 10 thousand yuan ) were willing to pay more than were those primed with independence ( M ¼ 1.23 , SD ¼ 0.96 ) .
This result indicated that the participants who were primed with interdependence sup- ported pro-environmental options , whereas those primed with independence did not .
Then , we added self-efficacy in eco-protection and average monthly spending as covariates .
Self-efficacy in eco-protectionwas revealed to have a significant effect on willingness to pay , F ( 1,112 ) ¼ 16.92 , p < 0.01 , h2 ¼ 0.13 ( Cohen 's d ¼ 0.77 ) , whereas monthly consumption did not .
The self-construals revealed no ef- fect on paying , F ( 1,112 ) ¼ 2.37 , p > 0.05 , h2¼ 0.02 ( Cohen 's d¼ 0.29 ) .
This result seemed to suggest that self-efficacy in eco-protection exerts more influence on the decision to pay more , but the orig- inal modeldwithout control variablesdhad supported our hypotheses .
Mediation analysis .
The Stroop interference score was calculated by subtracting the latencies of the congruent trials from those of the incongruent trials .
High performance scores indicated signifi- cant failure to override the interference , which in turn reflected low self-control .
We conducted an ANCOVA on the participants ' second Stroop interference scores using the baseline Stroop task scores as a covariate and found that interference was significantly lower among the interdependent priming group than the independent priming group , F ( 1,115 ) ¼ 5.88 , p < 0.05 , h2 ¼ 0.05 ( Cohen 's d ¼ 0.45 ) .
Priming with interdependence ( M ¼ 149.5 ms , SD ¼ 115.6 ms ) resulted in less response interference than did priming with independence ( M ¼ 179.7 ms , SD ¼ 112.3 ms ) , which indicated that the interdependent priming group had more self- control .
Finally , we conducted a bootstrap analysis ( Preacher & Hayes , 2008 ) to determine whether self-control mediated the effect of self-construal on the amount offered for the pro-environmental option .
In this analysis , the priming group served as the indepen- dent variable ; the second Stroop task score served as the mediator variable ; and the first Stroop score was the covariate .
The results revealed a 95 % bias-corrected and accelerated confidence interval ( CI ) [ 0.0016 , 0.2183 ] that excluded zero , based on 5000 bootstrap samples .
Thus , our results verified themediating role of self-control on the effect of self-construal on the outcome of pro-environment- self-interest conflict .
2.2.3 .
Discussion Study 2 demonstrated that self-control mediated the effect of self-construal on the pro-environmental-self-interest conflict .
After controlling for the baseline Stroop performance , the participantsprimed with interdependence exhibited less interference in the Stroop task than the participants primed with independence .
Additionally , Study 2 revealed that the interdependent participants were more willing to pay higher prices to purchase the pro- environmental product .
Although the dependent variable in the ‘ willingness to pay ’ design in Study 2 had a smaller effect ( eta square ¼ 0.04 ) than did the inclinations toward self-interested and pro-environmental options in the decisions in Study 1b ( eta square ¼ 0.10 ) , the results still illustrated that the tendency to support pro-environmental options differed between the self- construals .
This study revealed that the interdependent group was more inclined to select the pro-environmental option thanwas the independent group .
2.3 .
Study 3 : manipulation of self-control using a moderator We experimentally manipulated self-control in Study 3 to obtain further evidence for the mediator mechanism using the moderation approach ( Spencer , Zanna , & Fong , 2005 ) .
The manip- ulation materials were 6 min of self-edited videos ( without audio ) that were modified versions of those used in the classic self- regulation attention methods ( Schmeichel , Vohs , & Baumeister , 2003 ) .
The scenario involved the purchase of an eco-friendly air- conditioning system , and the dependent variable was the inclina- tion toward pro-environmental or self-interested options and was similar to those used in Studies 1a and 1b .
2.3.1 .
Method Participants and procedure .
A total of 81 Peking University students ( 40 males , 41 females , Mage ¼ 23.38 , SD ¼ 2.35 ) were recruited using the campus BBS , which cost 10 yuan ( RMB ) .
The participants came to the laboratory and were randomly assigned to the depletion or control condition .
In the ego depletion condition , the participants were instructed to watch two simultaneous videos playing side by side on a single screen .
The participants were required to watch the video on the left , which showed a woman giving a lecture and to ignore the video on the right ( which dis- played unrelated titles ) .
In the control condition , the participants were provided with only one screen and no specific instructions .
After watching the video , the participants were asked to answer the manipulation questions ( “ How difficult was it to watch the video ? ” where 1 ¼ very easy 7 ¼ very difficult , and “ How much effort was required from you to complete the task ? ” where 1 ¼ no effort and 7 ¼ great effort ; a ¼ 0.88 ) .
Next , the participants were randomly assigned to interdepen- dence- or independence- primed groups in amanner similar to that of Studies 1b and 2 .
The participants read the following scenario : “ Your house needs an air-conditioner , and your budget is approximately 3 thousand yuan ( RMB ) .
Therefore , you go to the shopping mall .
An agent recommends two types of air-conditioner .
There are no substantial differences between the two in terms of friction and power consumption .
The only specific difference is that the type A model utilizes a fluorine-free refrigerant and is thus more eco-friendly .
However , the price of the type A air-conditioner is greater than that of the type B model by 600 yuan. ” After reading the scenario , the participants answered questions regarding their intentions to buy an air-conditioning system ( 1 ¼ definitely choose type A , 7 ¼ definitely choose type B ) on a 7- point scale .
They also answered demographic questions and ques- tions that aimed to measure their sense of self-efficacy in eco- protection as controls .
2.3.2 .
Results Manipulation checks .
An independent-sample t-test was con- ducted to differentiate the difficulties of the video-watching task in Y. Chuang et al .
/ Journal of Environmental Psychology 46 ( 2016 ) 96e105102the depletion and control conditions .
The expectation was verified .
The participants in the depletion condition ( M ¼ 4.22 , SD ¼ 1.73 ) rated the task of watching the video as more difficult and requiring greater effort than did those in the control condition ( M ¼ 2.86 , SD ¼ 1.43 ) , t ( 79 ) ¼ 3.85 , p < 0.01 , Cohen 's d ¼ 0.86 .
The manipu- lation successfully varied the level of self-control .
Statistical tests revealed that the sense of self-efficacy in eco- protection of the participants in the depletion and control condi- tions differed significantly , t ( 79 ) ¼ 2.62 , p < 0.05 , Cohen 's d ¼ 0.59 .
Thus , we conducted a 2 ( self-regulatory : depletion vs. control ) 2 ( priming group : interdependence vs. independence ) ANCOVA us- ing self-efficacy in eco-protection as a covariate .
The self-efficacy in eco-protection was revealed as having a significant effect on the participants ' preferences F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 26.59 , p < 0.01 , s2 ¼ 0.26 ( Cohen 's d ¼ 1.59 ) , which was similar to the results in previous studies .
Our main results revealed a significant interaction effect , F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 4.27 , p < 0.05 , s2 ¼ 0.05 ( Cohen 's d ¼ 2.85 ) .
The effect of different self-control levels was also significant , F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 9.59 , p < 0.01 , s2 ¼ 0.11 ( Cohen 's d ¼ 0.94 ) , whereas the effect of group ( i.e. , independent or interdependent priming ) was not , F ( 1 , 76 ) ¼ 0.34 , p > 0.05 , s2 ¼ 0.003 ( Cohen 's d ¼ 0.47 ) .
A simple main effect analysis was conducted .
In the control condition , the results revealed that participants primed with interdependence ( M ¼ 2.10 , SD ¼ 1.33 ) were more inclined toward the pro-environmental option than were those primed with inde- pendence ( M ¼ 3.10 , SD ¼ 1.62 ) , t ( 38 ) ¼ 2.13 , p < 0.05 , Cohen 's d ¼ 0.67 , which was consistent with the results of Study 1b .
In contrast , in the depleted condition , the two priming groups exhibited no difference in their choices between the conflicting options , t ( 39 ) ¼ 0.69 , p > 0.05 , Cohen 's d ¼ 0.22 ( see Fig .
2 ) .2.3.3 .
Discussion The results of Study 3 provided further evidence that in in- dividuals dominated by interdependence or independence , self- control was a mediating factor that affected their inclination to- ward pro-environmental or self-interested options .
Self-control is predicted to be an important resource for interdependent in- dividuals , who use it to restrain their desires for self-interested choices .
However , when interdependent people have had to exert self-control in a previous condition , causing the depletion of their self-control , they tend choose the self-interested option .
This result is consistent with previous research ( Baumeister et al. , 2007 ; Muraven & Baumeister , 2000 ) .
In the absence of self-control ( i.e. , the depletion condition ) , the difference in inclination toward pro- environmental and self-interested options between the1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 depletion control cost-saving interdependece independence eco-friendly Fig .
2 .
Mean preferences the for type A ( eco-friendly ) and type B ( cost-saving ) air- conditioning systems following interdependence and independence priming under the depletion and control conditions in Study 3.interdependent and independent groups decreased .
However , the results from the control condition are consistent with the findings of Study 1b , which showed that the participants who were primed with interdependence were more inclined toward the pro- environmental option than those who were primed with inde- pendence .
These results indicate that interdependent individuals are required to utilize their self-control resources to restrain their desire for self-interest , but when they are in an ego-depletion condition , they are less able to make themselves choose a pro- environmental option .
3 .
General discussion The present investigation began with the idea that self- construals would influence the choices between conflicting pro- environment and self-interested options .
We provided empirical evidence that individuals with interdependence were more in- clined toward the pro-environmental options than those with in- dependence .
The three experiments reported in this article provide support for this idea .
The conflict scenarios were designed in green consumption situations ; i.e. , the participants were required to select either a cost-saving product for self-interested reasons or an expensive product for environmental reasons .
These products included take-out boxes ( Study 1a ) , eco-friendly vehicles ( Studies 1b and 2 ) , and eco-friendly air-conditioning systems ( Study 3 ) .
Both chronic ( i.e. , measured with a scale , Study 1a ) and exper- imentally induced orientations ( Studies 1b and 2 ) produced similar results : participants with interdependent orientations were more inclined toward the pro-environmental choices than those with independent orientations .
Studies 2 and 3 further demonstrated that self-control was a mediating factor of these effects .
In Study 2 , participants primed with interdependence exhibited more self- control than those primed with independence as measured by their Stroop task performance .
In Study 3 , we found that the effect was diminished in an ego-depletion condition , which indicates that self-control is a crucial mediator .
Self-control is an important factor that helps individuals with an interdependent orientation restrain their self-interested desires .
In particular , we conducted these studies in a Chinese context .
The self-construal condition revealed main effects across studies , but when manipulated in an ego-depletion condition ( Study 3 ) , inter- dependent individuals are not significantly different compared with independent individuals .
Our results indicated that Chinese people with strong interdependent orientations can follow normative options ( i.e. , pro-environment ) , but doing so requires them to consume self-control resources .
When that self-control resource has been depleted , even interdependent people may not have the power to restrain their motives of self-interest .
Our find- ings also supported Seeley and Gardner ( 2003 ) who showed that people with social orientation ( i.e. , interdependence ) are better able to regulate their desires to harmonize with others and to conform to social expectations ( see more discussion in Section 3.1 , Theoretical contribution ) .
Furthermore , our results showed a significant effect for “ envi- ronmental protection self-efficacy. ” Although we obtained the same results regardless of whether the control variables of “ self- efficacy in eco-protection ” were included or excluded , we should still be concerned with the effect of “ self-efficacy in eco-protection ” which is a measure of whether people believe their actions can benefit the environment .
3.1 .
Theoretical contribution We extended prior research that has shown the impact of self- construal on pro-environmental choices ( e.g. , Arnocky et al. , Y. Chuang et al .
/ Journal of Environmental Psychology 46 ( 2016 ) 96e105 1032007 ) .
Our research verified that individuals ' self-construals can influence their decision-making preferences when faced with choices imbued with conflict between pro-environmental and self- interested motivations .
To address such conflicts , we can either strengthen personal pro-environmental concerns or reduce self- interested preferences .
This study focused on the latter aspect .
We found that people with interdependent orientations exhibit better self-control performances ( Study 2 ) and were better able to suppress their self-interested ( i.e. , cost-saving ) desires .
This result indicates that self-control is a mediating factor that helps interde- pendent individuals follow normative choices and reduces their self-interested tendencies .
However , when their self-control resource is depleted ( Study 3 ) , the difference preference between interdependent and independent individuals disappears .
Although Seeley and Gardner ( 2003 ) found that people with strong social orientation were less depleted after exerting self- control than people with weak social orientation , we found that after self-control depletion , interdependent people acted no differently than independent peopledboth groups chose the self- interest option more often .
Initially , these results seemed contra- dictory .
However , our studies were conducted within a Chinese context by trait and by priming , while Seeley and Gardner ( 2003 ) studies were conducted across different cultures ( US vs. Chinese ) , which may have been the cause of the different results .
In addition , according to the strength model of self-control ( Baumeister et al. , 2007 ; Muraven & Baumeister , 2000 ) , people in ego-depletion conditions perform worse on subsequent tasks that require self- control .
Self-control resources are also required for interdepen- dent individuals to resist temptations and choose idealistic options that may benefit their future or social group .
Therefore , in Study 3 , interdependent participants in a depletion condition did not have sufficient remaining self-control to inhibit their self-interest .
These results are not contrary to the findings of Seeley and Gardner ( 2003 ) ; instead , they emphasize that adequate self-control re- sources are a substantial factor in the ability of interdependent people to make pro-environmental choices .
3.2 .
Practical implications According to the 2012 Environmental Performance Index ( EPI ) report , China ranked 116th out of 132 countries .
Environmental issues have become a substantial factor in restricting China 's eco- nomic growth and social stability .
The behavior of the general population during their daily lives can not be ignored because some patterns of consumption accelerate the deterioration of the envi- ronment such as purchasing products that increase pollution but save money .
It is true that when faced with conflicts between the environment and self-interest , individuals might fail to engage in environmental behaviors .
This study demonstrated that individuals with orientations between independence and interdependence exhibit different decisions in such situations .
Our research adopted a laboratory approach to priming the participants ' specific self-construals as either independent or interdependent .
The results suggest that priming individuals ' interdependent orientations can improve their likelihood of mak- ing pro-environmental choices .
Therefore , by launching new eco- friendly products and publicizing conservation-promoting behav- iors , policy makers and related agencies might activate people 's interdependent orientations .
It should be noted that consideration must be made concerning the object of individuals ' interdependent orientations .
For example , prior studies have shown that adver- tisement slogans can activate different self-construals in in- dividuals ( e.g. , Aaker & Lee , 2001 ; Hamilton & Biehal , 2005 ) .
When policy makers and related agencies employ slogans such as “ Protect our earth today for our children 's tomorrow ” to prime people'sinterdependent orientations for environmental purposes , such slogans may influence only individuals with children , have no impact on childless individuals .
However , the pro-environmental preference effect from prim- ing individuals ' interdependent orientation can fail when their self- control resources are depleted .
Thus , reducing the condition of self- control depletion in daily life should also be considered .
In partic- ular , when people face a conflicting choice between self-interest and normative desire , if we wish people follow the social norm , we need to avoid having them make such choices in a depleted condition .
3.3 .
Limitation and future direction The present research sought to examine China 's environmental conundrum ; thus , only Chinese university students were recruited , and this study lacks any comparison with Western subjects .
How- ever , the results illustrate that the relationship between distinct self-construals and conflicts between pro-environmental and self- interested sentiments are widespread psychological phenomena that might extend universally and be represented across cultures .
It is important to realize that our studies did not indicate that independent people are less eco-friendly or performworse on tasks involving self-control .
The studies indicate only thatdwhen facing conflict between pro-environment and self-interestdindependent people may more often prefer a self-interested choice when compared with interdependent people .
In addition , independent individuals might not face such conflicts between self-interested and pro-environmental choices .
Moreover , their preferences may currently be more influenced by other personal or social factors ( see more details in Gifford & Nilsson , 2014 ) .
In recent years in China , people have only gradually increased their eco-awareness , but this awareness is not stronger than in Western countries .
Therefore , when Chinese individuals face conflicts between self- interest and the environment , they might be easily influenced by their self-construal and self-control .
Although we consider self-control as an important mediating factor to reduce self-interested preference , we can not represent self-control as always resulting in pro-environmental choices .
Other factors might impact the selection process , for example , the environmental concerns of individuals might foster their habitual preferential behavior for eco-friendly products .
Moreover , when choosing products under time pressure , people might simply follow their intuition .
Individuals ' self-construal tendencies can be either chronic or influenced by priming .
When both conditions are in the same di- rection , the individual 's preference will stay the same , whereas when the two conditions are dissimilar , the effect may be weaker .
In our studies , we adopted two priming procedures to successfully confirm our manipulation , but in the real world , if the situational cue priming is not strong enough , it may fail to influence in- dividuals ' distinct chronic orientations .
Thus , it should be further considered how we can successfully activate individuals ' interde- pendent orientations to prompt pro-environmental preferences .
Additionally , the self-interested goals in the scenarios used in the studies were related only to financial costs .
Future studies might consider relating environmental concerns to a broader range of similar conflicting scenarios that involve other costs such as effort or time .
For example , such studies could ask participants to be environmental volunteers or measure participants ' waste collection behavior ( e.g. , whether they make an effort to dispose of bottles in recycling bins ) .
Moreover , the present study focused on whether self-control played a mediating role ; however , there are likely other mediating factors that further research should consider .
For example , guilt might influence interdependent people to Y. Chuang et al .
/ Journal of Environmental Psychology 46 ( 2016 ) 96e105104engage in pro-environmental behaviors ; some people might experience guilt and discomfort if they do not act according to social expectations .
The priming of self-construals in our study was based on previous laboratory methods and may have been slightly monotonous .
To improve upon the current study , future studies could employ approaches that are more ecologically relevant such as the use of advertisement slogans .
Additionally , an individual 's self-construal is not limited to re- lationships with others but can also be related to the environment .
Davis , Green , and Reed ( 2009 ) suggested measuring the inclusion of nature in the self and found that individuals who are closer to the environment exhibit more pro-environmental behaviors .
This finding agreeswith the viewof Arnocky et al .
( 2007 ) , who proposed a meta-personal self-construal by which the self is associated with nature .
People with this type of self-construal are predicted to exhibit more environmentally friendly behaviors and eco- cooperation .
In its traditional philosophy , China not only aspires to a culture with an interdependent orientation , but the people of China also believe in the concept of nature and people as one ( i.e. , a meta-personality ) .
Based on this ancient Chinese belief , future re- searchers should consider how the pro-environmental and inter- dependent orientations of the Chinese people can be combined and use these ideas to explore novel ways to make substantial contri- butions to environmental protection .
3.4 .
Conclusion In conclusion , the current findings suggest that when faced with a conflict between pro-environmental and self-interested options , people with interdependent orientations choose a pro- environmental option more often than those with independent orientations .
This research also provides evidence that differences in self-control capacity for people with interdependent and inde- pendent orientations is a mediating factor that enhances the interdependent participants ' pro-environmental tendencies by allowing them to suppress their self-interested desires .
Acknowledgements This researchwas financially funded by the General ( 71172024 & 71472205 ) and Key ( 91224002 ) Program of National Natural Sci- ence Foundation of China .
We are grateful to three anonymous reviewers whose supportive and insightful suggestions helped us to improve this work .
References Aaker , J. L. , & Lee , A. Y .
( 2001 ) .
“ I ” seek pleasures and “ We ” avoid pains : the role of self-regulatory goals in information processing and persuasion .
Journal of Consumer Research , 28 ( 1 ) , 33e49 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1086/321946 .
Arnocky , S. , Stroink , M. , & DeCicco , T. ( 2007 ) .
Self-construal predicts environmental concern , cooperation , and conservation .
Journal of Environmental Psychology , 27 ( 4 ) , 255e264 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2007.06.005 .
Baumeister , R. F. , & Heatherton , T. F. ( 1996 ) .
Self-regulation failure : an overview .
Psychological Inquiry , 7 ( 1 ) , 1e15 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.2307/1449145 .
Baumeister , R. F. , Vohs , K. D. , & Tice , D. M. ( 2007 ) .
The strength model of self- control .
Current Directions in Psychological Science , 16 ( 6 ) , 351e355 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.2307/20183234 .
Brewer , M. B. , & Gardner , W. ( 1996 ) .
Who is this ‘ We ’ ?
Levels of collective identity and self representations .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 71 ( 1 ) , 83e93 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.71.1.83 .
China Environmental Awareness Program , CEAP .
( 2007 ) .
Environmental survey released in Beijing ( 2008 , April ) .
Retrieved January 27 , 2015 , from http : //www .
chinaceap.org/news/viewen.asp ? id¼187 .
Cross , S. E. , Hardin , E. E. , & Gercek-Swing , B .
( 2011 ) .
The what , how , why , and where of self-construal .
Personality and Social Psychology Review , 15 ( 2 ) , 142e179 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/1088868310373752 .
Davis , J. L. , Green , J. D. , & Reed , A .
( 2009 ) .
Interdependence with the environment : commitment , interconnectedness , and environmental behavior .
Journal of Environmental Psychology , 29 ( 2 ) , 173e180 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2008.11.001 .
Dawes , R. M. ( 1980 ) .
Social dilemmas .
Annual Review of Psychology , 31 ( 1 ) , 169e193 .
De Young , R. ( 1996 ) .
Some psychological aspects of reduced consumption behavior : the role of intrinsic satisfaction and competence motivation .
Environment and Behavior , 28 ( 3 ) , 358e409 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/0013916596283005 .
Environmental Performance Index ( EPI ) 2012 , Retrieved January 27 , 2015 , from http : //epi.yale.edu/files/2012_epi_report.pdf .
Evans , L. , Maio , G. R. , Corner , A. , Hodgetts , C. J. , Ahmed , S. , & Hahn , U .
( 2013 ) .
Self- interest and pro-environmental behaviour .
Nature Climate Change , 3 ( 2 ) , 122e125 .
Fujita , K. , Trope , Y. , Liberman , N. , & Levin-Sagi , M. ( 2006 ) .
Construal levels and self- control .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 90 ( 3 ) , 351e367 .
Gagnon Thompson , S. C. , & Barton , M. A .
( 1994 ) .
Ecocentric and anthropocentric attitudes toward the environment .
Journal of Environmental Psychology , 14 ( 2 ) , 149e157 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0272-4944 ( 05 ) 80168-9 .
Gailliot , M. T. , Baumeister , R. F. , DeWall , C. N. , Maner , J. K. , Plant , E. A. , Tice , D. M. , et al.Schmeichel , B. J .
( 2007 ) .
Self-control relies on glucose as a limited energy source : willpower is more than a metaphor .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 92 ( 2 ) , 325 .
Gardner , W. L. , Gabriel , S. , & Lee , A. Y .
( 1999 ) .
“ I ” value freedom , but “ We ” value relationships : self-construal priming mirrors cultural differences in judgment .
Psychological Science , 10 ( 4 ) , 321e326 .
Gifford , R. , & Nilsson , A .
( 2014 ) .
Personal and social factors that influence pro- environmental concern and behaviour : a review .
International Journal of Psy- chology , 49 ( 3 ) , 141e157 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1002/ijop.12034 .
Griskevicius , V. , Tybur , J. M. , & Van den Bergh , B .
( 2010 ) .
Going green to be seen : status , reputation , and conspicuous conservation .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 98 ( 3 ) , 392e404 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0017346 .
Hamilton , R. W. , & Biehal , G. J .
( 2005 ) .
Achieving your goals or protecting their future ?
The effects of self-view on goals and choices .
Journal of Consumer Research , 32 ( 2 ) , 277e283 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1086/432237 .
Hofmann , W. , Friese , M. , & Strack , F. ( 2009 ) .
Impulse and self-control from a dual- systems perspective .
Perspectives on Psychological Science , 4 ( 2 ) , 162e176 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.2307/40212310 .
Howard , E. S. , Gardner , W. L. , & Thompson , L. ( 2007 ) .
The role of the self-concept and the social context in determining the behavior of power holders : self- construal in intergroup versus dyadic dispute resolution negotiations .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 93 ( 4 ) , 614e631 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 0022-3514.93.4.614 .
Kitayama , S. , & Park , J .
( 2013 ) .
Error-related brain activity reveals self-centric motivation : culture matters .
Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 143 ( 1 ) .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0031696 .
Kitayama , S. , Park , H. , Sevincer , A. T. , Karasawa , M. , & Uskul , A. K. ( 2009 ) .
A cultural task analysis of implicit independence : comparing North America , Western Europe , and East Asia .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 97 ( 2 ) , 236e255 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0015999 .
Kollmuss , A. , & Agyeman , J .
( 2002 ) .
Mind the gap : why do people act environ- mentally and what are the barriers to pro-environmental behavior ?
Environ- mental Education Research , 8 ( 3 ) , 239 .
Kuhn , M. H. , & McPartland , T. S. ( 1954 ) .
An empirical investigation of self-attitudes .
American Sociological Review , 19 ( 1 ) , 68e76 .
Lee , J .
A. , & Holden , S. J .
( 1999 ) .
Understanding the determinants of environmentally conscious behavior .
Psychology and Marketing , 16 ( 5 ) , 373e392 .
Lindenberg , S. , & Steg , L. ( 2007 ) .
Normative , gain and hedonic goal frames guiding environmental behavior .
Journal of Social Issues , 63 ( 1 ) , 117e137 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4560.2007.00499.x .
Lubell , M. ( 2002 ) .
Environmental activism as collective action .
Environment and Behavior , 34 ( 4 ) , 431e454 .
Markus , H. R. , & Kitayama , S. ( 1991 ) .
Culture and the self : implications for cognition , emotion , and motivation .
Psychological Review , 98 ( 2 ) , 224e253 .
Martinsson , P. , Myrseth , K. O. R. , & Wollbrant , C. ( 2012 ) .
Reconciling pro-social vs. selfish behavior : on the role of self-control .
Judgment and Decision Making , 7 ( 3 ) , 304 .
Masuda , T. , & Nisbett , R. E. ( 2001 ) .
Attending holistically versus analytically : comparing the context sensitivity of Japanese and Americans .
Journal of Per- sonality and Social Psychology , 81 ( 5 ) , 922e934 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022- 3514.81.5.922 .
Milkman , K. L. , Rogers , T. , & Bazerman , M. H. ( 2008 ) .
Harnessing our inner angels and demons : what we have learned about want/should conflicts and how that knowledge can help us reduce short-sighted decision making .
Perspectives on Psychological Science , 3 ( 4 ) , 324e338 .
Muraven , M. ( 1998 ) .
Mechanism of self-control failure : Motivation and limited re- sources ( 9833901 Ph.D. ) .
Ann Arbor : Case Western Reserve University .
Retrieved from http : //search.proquest.com/docview/304431213 ? accountid¼13151 ( Pro- Quest Dissertations and Theses A & I : The Sciences and Engineering Collection database ) .
Muraven , M. , & Baumeister , R. F. ( 2000 ) .
Self-regulation and depletion of limited resources : does self-control resemble a muscle ?
Psychological Bulletin , 126 ( 2 ) , 247e259 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.126.2.247 .
Muraven , M. , Baumeister , R. F. , & Tice , D. M. ( 1999 ) .
Longitudinal improvement of self-regulation through practice : building self-control strength through repeated exercise .
The Journal of Social Psychology , 139 ( 4 ) , 446e457 .
Muraven , M. , Tice , D. M. , & Baumeister , R. F. ( 1998 ) .
Self-control as a limited resource : regulatory depletion patterns .
Journal of Personality and Social Psy- chology , 74 ( 3 ) , 774e789 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.74.3.774 .
Y. Chuang et al .
/ Journal of Environmental Psychology 46 ( 2016 ) 96e105 105Preacher , K. J. , & Hayes , A. F. ( 2008 ) .
Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models .
Behavior Research Methods , 40 ( 3 ) , 879e891 .
Samuelson , C. D. ( 1990 ) .
Energy conservation : a social dilemma approach .
Social Behaviour , 5 ( 4 ) , 207e230 .
Schmeichel , B. J. , Vohs , K. D. , & Baumeister , R. F. ( 2003 ) .
Intellectual performance and ego depletion : role of the self in logical reasoning and other information processing .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 85 ( 1 ) , 33e46 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.85.1.33 .
Seeley , E. A. , & Gardner , W. L. ( 2003 ) .
The “ Selfless ” and self-regulation : the role of chronic other-orientation in averting self-regulatory depletion .
Self and Identity , 2 ( 2 ) , 103e117 .
Shiv , B. , & Fedorikhin , A .
( 1999 ) .
Heart and mind in conflict : the interplay of affect and cognition in consumer decision making .
Journal of Consumer Research , 26 ( 3 ) , 278e292 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1086/209563 .
Singelis , T. M. ( 1994 ) .
The measurement of independent and interdependent self- construals .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 20 ( 5 ) , 580e591 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167294205014 .
Spector , P. E. , & Brannick , M. T. ( 2011 ) .
Methodological urban legends : the misuse of statistical control variables .
Organizational Research Methods , 14 ( 2 ) , 287e305.http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/1094428110369842 .
Spencer , S. J. , Zanna , M. P. , & Fong , G. T. ( 2005 ) .
Establishing a causal chain : why experiments are often more effective than meditational analyses in examining psychological processes .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 89 ( 6 ) , 845e851 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.89.6.845 .
Strack , F. , & Deutsch , R. ( 2004 ) .
Reflective and impulsive determinants of social behavior .
Personality and Social Psychology Review , 8 ( 3 ) , 220e247 .
http : // dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15327957pspr0803_1 .
Stroop , J. R. ( 1935 ) .
Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions .
Journal of Experimental Psychology , 18 ( 6 ) , 643 .
Thøgersen , J .
( 1996 ) .
Recycling and morality : a critical review of the literature .
Environment and Behavior , 28 ( 4 ) , 536e558 .
http : //dx.doi.org/10.1177/ 0013916596284006 .
Trafimow , D. , Triandis , H. C. , & Goto , S. G. ( 1991 ) .
Some tests of the distinction between the private self and the collective self .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 60 ( 5 ) , 649e655 .
Wang , Y.-H. , Yuan , Q.-H. , & Xu , Q.-M. ( 2008 ) .
A preliminary study on self- constructionals scales ( SCS ) of Chinese-version .
Chinese Journal of Clinical Psy- chology , 16 ( 6 ) , 602e604 .
