De Dreu_JournAppPsych_2009_eg0Q.pdf
a_x4_T_b1gE5P_uxvwgnF6s8lKzO-De_Dreu_JournAppPsych_2009_eg0Q.pdf.plain.html

Self-Interest and Other-Orientation in Organizational Behavior : Implications for Job Performance , Prosocial Behavior , and Personal Initiative Carsten K. W. De Dreu University of Amsterdam Aukje Nauta University of Amsterdam and Randstad HR Solutions In this article , the authors develop the self-concern and other-orientation as moderators hypothesis .
The authors argue that many theories on work behavior assume humans to be either self-interested or to be social in nature with strong other-orientation but that this assumption is empirically invalid and may lead to overly narrow models of work behavior .
The authors instead propose that self-concern and other- orientation are independent .
The authors also propose that job performance , prosocial behavior , and personal initiative are a function of ( a ) individual-level attributes , such as job characteristics when employees are high in self-concern , and ( b ) group-level attributes , such as justice climate when employees are high in other-orientation .
Three studies involving 4 samples of employees from a variety of organizations support these propositions .
Implications are discussed for theory on work behavior and interventions geared toward job enrichment and team-based working .
Keywords : self-interest , prosocial behavior , job performance , personal initiative , justice Perhaps humans are born with an innate tendency to be concerned with their self-interests , and their primary motive underlying ( social ) behavior is to safeguard and improve their self-interest .
It is not unlikely that this tendency to be concerned with the self is habitual , automatic , and oftentimes exercised without conscious thought .
How- ever , this does not exclude alternative , potentially more powerful motives ( Miller , 1999 ) .
Religious writings of various origins and popularity emphasize the importance of considering other ’ s needs and interests and of taking care of the weak and the poor .
The majority of fairytales we tell our children focus on the downsides of blatantly pursuing self-interests and the upsides of considering others ’ needs and interests .
Put differently , across the globe people teach each other the value of considering others ’ needs and concerns .
It is not unlikely that such other-orientation is equally habitual , automatic , and exer- cised without conscious thought .
That humans are driven by both self-interest and by other motives including other-orientation is an issue that social scientists and phi- losophers have pondered for many centuries , and it permeates orga- nizational psychology and organizational behavior in a multitude of ways ( Cropanzano , Goldman , & Folger , 2005 ; De Dreu , 2006 ; Fer- rero , Pfeffer , & Sutton , 2005 ; Godfrey , 2005 ; Meglino & Korsgaard , 2004 , 2007 ; Miller , 1999 ; Rocha & Ghoshal , 2006 ; Solomon , 2004 ) .
For example , work on leadership ( Blake & Mouton , 1964 ) and dispute resolution ( Rubin , Pruitt , & Kim , 1994 ) distinguishes between concern for self and concern for other , and it shows how these motives alone and in combination drive leader behavior and conflict manage- ment .
In work on self-construal , self-determination theory , and individualism–collectivism , it is commonly assumed that people view themselves either as independent and autonomous individuals or as interdependent with others ( e.g. , Deci & Ryan , 1985 ; Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ) .
Applications of social identity theory ( Tajfel & Turner , 1979 ) to work motivation indicate that the more people base part of their identity on features and characteristics of their work group or department , the more they are concerned with group welfare and the harder they work to benefit the group ( Ellemers , De Gilder , & Haslam , 2004 ) .
The Self-Concern and Other-Orientation as Moderators ( SCOOM ) Hypothesis In the present study , we build on these and related works to extend the understanding of the functions of self-concern and other-orientation in terms of information-processing tendencies and concomitant implications for work behavior .
We develop and test the SCOOM hypothesis .
Employees differ in the strength of self-interest motives ( self-concern ) and , likewise , in the strength of their other-orientation .
Self-concern and other-orientation are con- ceptualized as independent , orthogonal dimensions so that individ- uals can be high ( or low ) on one or both dimensions .
Self-concern is known to stimulate information search and processing of individual-level attributes and self-relevant consequences , and we suspect that these attributes and consequences thus have stronger relationships with a variety of work behaviors when self-concern is high rather than low .
Other-orientation , in contrast , is known to focus information search and processing on group-level attributes , Carsten K. W. De Dreu , Department of Psychology , University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , the Netherlands ; Aukje Nauta , Department of Psychology , University of Amsterdam , and Randstad HR Solutions , Diemen , the Netherlands .
This research was financially supported by the Van der Gaag Founda- tion , and by Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research Grant NWO- 407.07.701 awarded to Carsten K. W. De Dreu .
We thank Guurtje van Sloten and Karolus Kraan for their help in collecting the data .
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Carsten K. W. De Dreu , Department of Psychology , University of Amsterdam , Roetersstraat 15 , 1018 WB Amsterdam , the Netherlands .
E-mail : c.k.w.dedreu @ uva.nl Journal of Applied Psychology © 2009 American Psychological Association 2009 , Vol .
94 , No .
4 , 913–926 0021-9010/09/ $ 12.00 DOI : 10.1037/a0014494 913 social cues , and consequences , and we suspect that these attributes and consequences thus have stronger relationships with a variety of work behaviors when other-orientation is high rather than low .
Below , we further develop these ideas and connect them to related research areas .
Derivates of the SCOOM hypothesis were tested in four studies with samples of employees and their supervisors representative of a variety of jobs and organizations .
Origins of ( Co- ) Variations in Self-Concern and Other-Orientation For quite some time , scholars in both psychology and the organi- zational sciences assumed self-concern and other-orientation to rep- resent the end points of a bipolar continuum .
Even contemporary work on other-orientation assumes that having higher other- orientation implies a lower self-concern ( e.g. , Meglino & Korsgaard , 2004 , 2007 ) .
The SCOOM hypothesis proceeds on the basis of a rather different assumption .
Building on a growing body of theoretical and empirical work , we suspect that self-concern and other- orientation are orthogonal and independent .
Thus , variation in self- concern does not necessarily affect other-orientation and vice versa— someone can be high in self-concern and other-orientation , low in both , or high on one dimension and low on the other .
Some first support for this proposition follows from considering the antecedent conditions of self-concern and other-orientation .
Accumulating evidence indicates that variation in self-concern may be due to temperament , socialization , or situational demands and constraints .
For example , the more individuals see themselves as independent and autonomous , the more likely they are to have high self-concern ( Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ) .
Likewise , individ- uals with higher dispositional achievement motivation and a stron- ger performance orientation may have higher self-concern ( e.g. , D. C. McClelland , 1985 ; also see Moon , Kamdar , Mayer , & Takeucki , 2008 ) .
In negotiation and conflict , self-concern can be raised by setting higher aspirations ( see , e.g. , Druckman , 1994 ) , and work on social dilemmas showed that people have higher self-concern when prospective outcomes are framed as losses rather than gains ( Brewer & Kramer , 1986 ) .
Finally , employees have higher self-concern when they have good rather than bad alternatives to their current job contract ( Giebels , De Dreu , & Van de Vliert , 2000 ; Thau , Bennett , Stahlberg , & Werner , 2004 ) .
As with self-concern , variations in other-orientation may be due to temperament , socialization , or situational demands and constraints ; however , importantly , these are quite different from the ones deter- mining self-concern .
Thus , the more individuals see themselves as interdependent and part of a social system , the higher their other- orientation will be ( Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ) .
Higher other- orientation is higher among individuals with high concern for others ( Ravlin & Meglino , 1987 ) , high dispositional empathy ( Batson , 1998 ) , high perspective taking ability ( Davis , 1983 ) , and high agree- ableness ( Graziano , Jensen-Campbell , & Hair , 1996 ) .
A meta-analysis by De Dreu , Weingart , and Kwon ( 2000 ) further suggests that other- orientation is higher when employees are told that payment depends on how well they do as a group rather than as a person , when they anticipate future interaction with each other , when shared rather than different group membership is emphasized , or when others are friends rather than strangers .
Notwithstanding these arguments and evidence , in situ , self- concern , and other-orientation may be correlated—people working under a grading on the curve performance system may develop a high self-concern and a low other-orientation ( Pfeffer & Sutton , 2006 ) .
The other way around , specific traits may yield a correlation between self-concern and other-orientation .
For example , someone with a chronic prosocial value orientation combines high self-concern with high other-orientation ( Nauta , De Dreu , & Van der Vaart , 2002 ) , and conscientious people tend to combine high performance striving ( high self-concern ) with high duty striving ( high other-orientation ; Moon , 2001 ; Moon et al. , 2008 ) .
Finally , assessment methods may affect the correlation between both dimensions .
For example , ipsative methods force a trade-off between values and concerns ( M. A. Korsgaard , personal communication , May 2007 ) .
Thus , in specific contexts , self- concern and other-orientation may be correlated positively or nega- tively .
Across situations ( and studies ) , however , we expect these two dimensions to be uncorrelated , and the current study provides a first-time opportunity to test this prediction .
Motivated Information Processing Growing evidence suggests that self-concern and other- orientation not only drive behavior , such as helping , but also impact information processing tendencies ( e.g. , Camac , 1992 ; De Dreu , 2007 ; De Dreu , Beersma , Stroebe , & Euwema , 2006 ; De Dreu & Boles , 1998 ; Thompson , 1995 ; Van Kleef & De Dreu , 2002 ) .
Self-concern stimulates the individual to consider personal characteristics and qualities ( e.g. , competency needs , need for autonomy ) , personal inputs , and individual outcomes and suc- cesses .
Other-orientation , in contrast , leads the individual to con- sider collective ( group/organization ) characteristics and qualities ( e.g. , relatedness ) , joint inputs and outcomes , and collective suc- cess ( for further elaboration and review , see De Dreu & Carnevale , 2003 ; De Dreu , Nijstad , & Van Knippenberg , 2008 ) .
That self-concern and other-orientation drive employees to fo- cus their information search and processing on self-serving versus group-related cues means that these different cues will be more or less influential in driving work-related cognitions , motivations , and behaviors .
Because self-concern focuses information search and processing on self-related information ( e.g. , individual at- tributes , preferences , and personal states and desires ) , task-related cognitions , motives , and behaviors should be influenced more by these self-related cognitions when self-concern is high rather than low .
The biasing effects that self-concern and other-orientation have on information processing have been tested ; the implication that self-concern and other-orientation therefore moderate the impact of a variety of environmental cues on organizational behavior has not been tested .
The interesting implication is that well-known models of organizational behavior have stronger predictive valid- ity among employees high rather than low in self-concern , whereas other models have stronger predictive validity among employees high rather than low in other-orientation .
For example , in the valence–instrumentality–expectancy ( VIE ) model ( e.g. , Erez & Isen , 2002 ; Van Eerde & Thierry , 1996 ; Vroom , 1964 ) , work motivation is considered to be largely driven by personal outcomes that the individual employee anticipates or receives .
Likewise , most need-satisfaction models of job attitudes are “ similar to the rational economic man model of decision making , which argues that people make decisions consistent with the extent to which choice alternatives satisfy or do not satisfy their preferences of 914 DE DREU AND NAUTA self-interests ( Salancik & Pfeffer , 1977 , p. 437 ) .
Recent work on task autonomy and work performance takes a similar perspective : “ The combination of perceived benefits and costs associated with task autonomy .
.
.
will subsequently affect the motivational effect that such autonomy will have .
Giving autonomy to an employee who perceives great benefits and little cost to autonomy is likely to be motivating ” ( Langfred & Moye , 2004 , p. 936 ) .
Our reasoning implies that these and similar theoretical propositions are valid among employees high in self-concern more than among those low in self-concern .
Our reasoning also implies that variations in other-orientation do not moderate the predictive power of the above models .
Rather , other-orientation is expected to moderate the influence of such group-level constructs as team climate , working relationships , and opinions and beliefs held by others .
For example , we know that individuals prefer fair treatment of both oneself and one ’ s col- leagues , and we also know that perceived justice climate ( Nau- mann & Bennett , 2000 ) predicts work-performance ( Colquitt , Noe , & Jackson , 2002 ) as well as prosocial citizenship behavior ( e.g. , Liao & Rupp , 2005 ) .
We suspect that these relationships will be stronger among employees high rather than low in other- orientation ( and variations in self-concern will have little to no moderating impact ) .
Overview of the Present Study Figure 1 shows the SCOOM hypothesis in its entirety .
Work behavior is operationalized here in terms of the three constructs assessed in the current study—task performance ( Studies 1a–1b ) , prosocial behavior ( Study 2 ) , and personal initiative ( Study 3 ) .
These interrelated work behaviors are all assumed to be a function of both individual-level attributes—such as personal conse- quences , including pay and prestige and job characteristics ( the focus in the current study ) —and group-level attributes , such as opinions and beliefs held by colleagues and supervisors or the justice climate ( the focus in the current study ) .1 Figure 1 further shows that the extent to which individual-level attributes and consequences predict work behavior depends on the strength of someone ’ s self-concern ( a proposition tested in Studies 1 and 3 ) , and that the extent to which group-level attributes and conse- quences predict work behavior depends on the strength of some- one ’ s other-orientation ( a proposition tested in Studies 2 and 3 ) .
Importantly , Figure 1 also shows that other-orientation does not moderate the extent to which individual-level attributes and con- sequences predict work behavior and , similarly , that self-concern does not moderate the extent to which group-level attributes and consequences predict work behavior ( propositions examined in Studies 1–3 and Studies 2–3 , respectively ) .
Before moving on , it is important to note that the SCOOM hypothesis is related to the theory of other-orientation ( TOO ) , which proposes that the higher other-orientation is in employees , the less work motivation and job satisfaction is grounded in rational and deliberate consideration of job characteristics ( Kors- gaard , Meglino , & Lester , 1996 ; Meglino & Korsgaard , 2004 ) .
This argument is inconsistent with the SCOOM hypothesis , which predicts the job attributes–job performance relationship to be mod- erated by self-concern , not by other-orientation .
However , in their empirical assessments , Meglino and colleagues ( Korsgaard et al. , 1996 ; Meglino & Korsgaard , 2004 ) used ipsative measures of values in which self-concern and other-orientation were traded-off , and it is thus difficult to tell whether effects should be attributed to higher other-orientation , lower self-concern , or perhaps some com- bination ( De Dreu , 2006 ) .
Only by taking separate measures of self-concern and other-orientation can we establish whether it is variation in self-concern , or in other-orientation , that moderates the relationship between individual job attributes and work-related outcomes , such as job attitudes and work behaviors .
SCOOM and the Job Attributes–Performance Relationship : Studies 1a–1b Starting with the classical work by Hackman and Oldham ( 1975 ) , research has supported the idea that high-quality perfor- mance is a function of five “ core ” job dimensions—skill variety , task identity , task significance , job autonomy , and feedback .
In Studies 1a–1b , we expected to replicate this finding , with the exception that we focused on skill variety , job autonomy , and feedback ( the type of work and jobs studied in Studies 1a–1b were all quite high and homogeneous in terms of task identity and task significance ) .
However , because job characteristics are individual- level attributes , the SCOOM hypothesis implies that they impact work performance more among individuals high rather than low in self-concern .
Put differently , we expect job characteristics ( job autonomy , skill variety , feedback ) to relate positively to job per- formance , especially among employees high rather than low in self-concern .
Furthermore , and consistent with the SCOOM hy- pothesis outlined in Figure 1 , we did not expect other-orientation to moderate the relationship between job characteristics on the one hand , and job performance on the other.2 1 Our decision to focus on job characteristics as an individual-level attribute and justice climate as a group-level attribute was guided by the desire to remain firmly embedded in existing literatures clearly demon- strating a moderate relationship between these predictors on the one hand , and some relevant indicator of organizational behavior on the other .
There are other models and perspectives that we discussed , such as VIE or need satisfaction models of job satisfaction , and there is no particular reason to give priority to one over the other .
For an excellent overview of other individual and group-level predictors that may be similarly affected by self-concern and other-orientation , see Chen and Kanfer ( 2006 ) .
2 This predicted pattern is similar to the idea that growth need strength moderates the relationship between job attributes and work motivation ( Hackman & Oldham , 1975 ; Langfred & Moye , 2004 ; Loher , Noe , Moeller , & Fitzgerald , 1985 ; Spector , 1985 ) .
More generally , one may wonder how self-concern and other-orientation relate to other constructs in social and organizational psychology , such as growth need strength , in- ( ter ) dependent self-construal , dispositional agreeableness , and conscien- tiousness .
Pilot testing revealed moderate ( no ) correlations among self- concern ( other-orientation ) and independent self-construal , growth need strength , and the achievement component of conscientiousness ; likewise , we found moderate ( no ) correlations among other-orientation ( self- concern ) and interdependent self-construal , agreeableness , and the duty component of conscientiousness .
Thus , both self-concern and other- orientation are related yet distinct from these other constructs .
Specifically , self-concern is not the same as growth need strength , and , as far as we know , the moderating effect of growth need strength is not explained in terms of information processing tendencies , as is the moderating influence of self-concern .
As such , we suspect ( but did not test ) that self-concern and growth need strength may have similar effects but through different mech- anisms .
915SELF-INTEREST AND OTHER-ORIENTATION Method Participants and procedure .
In Study 1a , we approached members of an online research panel of a market research agency ( PanelClix , see www.panelclix.com ) who had indicated that they supervised people at work ( N 1,525 ) .
They were asked by e-mail to participate in a research project on employment relations funded by the Dutch Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment ( Spring 2005 ) .
The sample was representative for the Dutch labor force .
Potential respondents were asked whether they were willing to invite one of their employees to fill out a comparable question- naire .
They were assured that the employee would not get any information about their own answers nor would they be able to see their employee ’ s answers ( both here and in subsequent studies , we ensured no employees shared the same supervisor , thus guarantee- ing statistical independence ) .
This resulted in a total of 144 supervisor–employee dyads.3 Sixty-five employees and 35 super- visors were female .
Employees averaged 34.42 years of age ( SD 10.02 ) , and supervisors averaged 39.04 years of age ( SD 9.35 ) .
Employees ( supervisors ) were in their current job for an average of 5.22 years ( SD 7.43 ) .
In Study 1b , a total of 250 supervisors and their employees employed within the health care industry were invited by their human resources ( HR ) director to participate in a survey on employee–employer relationships .
Following this initial contact , the employee and supervisor were asked to independently fill out a paper–pencil questionnaire and to return it within 2 weeks to the researchers using a prestamped envelope .
Up to a maximum of three e-mail reminders were sent in the following 4 weeks .
Ano- nymity and confidentiality were ensured .
Counting only those in which both employee and supervisor responded , the total response rate was 57 % .
Excluding cases with more than 10 % missing values slightly reduced the sample to N 129 employees ( 79 men ) and N 129 supervisors ( 102 men ) .
Employee–supervisor pairs worked in small ( 100 employees ; 26 % ) or relatively large ( 100 employees ; 74 % ) organizations .
The employees averaged 39 years of age ( SD 9.82 ) ; 33 % had a high school degree , and 28 % had a university degree .
They had an average job tenure of 8 years ( SD 6.67 ) , and they worked with their direct supervisor for an average of 3.22 years ( SD 2.89 ) .
As is quite typical in this industry , and within Dutch society , 33 % of the employees worked full-time , and 67 % of the employees worked part-time .
Most respondents performed jobs that involved working with people ( e.g. , clients , patients ; 53 % ) or administration ( 25.4 % ) .
Materials .
In both studies , we used the same materials .
All measures used 5-point scales ( 1 not at all , 5 very much ) .
Self-concern was assessed with the following items : “ at work .
.
.
I am concerned about my own needs and interests/my personal 3 The net response rate thus is 9 % , which is low .
However , a much higher percentage agreed to proceed , but we were unable to locate their employees , or we did not obtain a response .
It thus is difficult to assess nonresponse .
Because in Study 1b ( self- ) selection bias is less of a problem , yet similar patterns of results were obtained , we assume this specific procedure and resulting low response rate not to be a validity threat .
Individual-Level Attributes ( e.g. , Job Characteristics ) Group-related Attributes ( e.g. , justice climate ) - Task Performance - Prosocial Behavior - Personal Initiative Self-Concern ρ = 0 ρ > 0 ρ > 0 ρ > 0 Other-Orientation ρ > 0 Self-related information processing Other-related information processing Figure 1 .
The self-concern and other-orientation as moderators ( SCOOM ) hypothesis applied to task perfor- mance , personal initiative , and prosocial behavior .
The dotted lines reflect that self-concern and other-orientation not only influence information processing tendencies but also directly feed into work behavior , such as task performance , personal initiative , and prosocial behavior .
Although not of central interest here , and not measured in the current studies , the SCOOM hypothesis allows for the possibility that specific traits and states drive work behavior through their influence on self-concern and other-orientation .
916 DE DREU AND NAUTA goals and aspirations are important to me/I consider my own wishes and desires to be relevant. ” Other-orientation was assessed with “ at work .
.
.
I am concerned about the needs and interests of others such as my colleagues/the goals and aspirations of col- leagues are important to me/I consider others ’ wishes and desires to be relevant. ” Job characteristics were assessed with three items each , modeled after the original Job Diagnostic Survey .
Sample items included the following : “ The work activities provide direct and clear information about the effectiveness ( e.g. , quality and quantity ) of my job performance ” ( feedback ) ; “ The job requires me to use a number of complex or high-level skills ” ( skill variety ) ; and “ The job allows me to make my own decisions about how to schedule my work ” ( job autonomy ) .
Finally , we included several control variables .
Respondent sex was included to account for the possibility that men and women differ in their self-concern and other-orientation .
Job tenure was included to account for the pos- sibility that longer job tenure may come with different jobs and variation in job characteristics .
In both studies , exploratory as well as confirmatory factor analyses provided support for discriminant validity and revealed that the two concern dimensions and the three job attribute dimensions were assessed as intended .
Further details can be obtained from Carsten K. W. De Dreu .
Job performance was rated by the employee ’ s direct supervisor on a three-item scale : ( 1 ) “ Does this employee ’ s performance match the organization ’ s standards and requirements ? ” ( 1 not at all , 7 beyond call of duty ) ; ( 2 ) “ Have you had , in the past year , problems with this employee regarding his or her performance ? ” ( 1 not at all , 7 very much so ; reverse coded ) ; and ( 3 ) “ Please rate this employ- ee ’ s performance in the past 4 weeks ” ( 1 very poor , 7 excellent ) .
Ratings were averaged into one job performance index .
Results and Discussion Descriptive statistics .
The few missing values were replaced by the scale mean .
Table 1 gives descriptive statistics for Study 1a and Study 1b ( below and above the diagonal ) .
It shows that self-concern and other-orientation are moderately and positively correlated , and that job autonomy consistently correlated with supervisor ratings of job performance .
SCOOM .
We tested predictions using moderated multiple re- gressions ; we centered predictor variables on the mean , and we interpreted interaction effects by testing for simple slopes at 1 standard deviation from the mean .
Supervisor ratings of job per- formance served as the dependent variable .
In Step 1 , control variables ( employee ’ s gender , job tenure , age ) were included .
In Step 2 , we entered main effects for job attributes ( autonomy , skill variety , feedback ) and self-concern and other-orientation .
In Step 3 , we entered interactions among job attributes on the one hand , and other-orientation on the other hand , as well as the interactions among job attributes on the one hand , and self-concern on the other .
( We explored whether including other two-way interactions and all possible three-way interactions altered the results and conclusions .
This was not the case . )
Final regression results are summarized in Table 2 .
In Study 1a ( left-hand column ) , the overall model was significant , R2 .21 , F ( 14 , 129 ) 2.42 , p .05 .
The control variables in Step 1 did not account for a significant proportion of the variance , R2 .01 , F ( 3 , 129 ) 1 , ns .
However , the main effects in Step 2 did , R2 .12 , F ( 5 , 129 ) 4.02 , p .025 .
Table 2 shows that this effect was due to job autonomy and feedback .
Step 3 explained further variance , R2 .08 , F ( 6 , 129 ) 2.29 , p .04 .
Table 2 shows that this is primarily due to the significant interactions among job autonomy and self-concern , and skill variety and self-concern ( as well as the unanticipated interaction among other-orientation and skill variety ; this was not replicated in Study 1b and is ignored ) .
Simple slopes analyses showed that as job autonomy increases , supervisor ratings of job performance are higher , especially among employees with high self-concern , B 0.27 , t 2.28 , p .025 .
When employees are low in self-concern , there is no relationship between job autonomy and job performance , B 0.01 , t 1 , p .89 .
Further , as skill variety increases , supervisor ratings of job performance tend to be higher , especially among employees with high self- concern , B 0.10 , t 1.64 , p .051 ( one-tailed ) .
When em- ployees are low in self-concern , skill variety did not predict job performance , B 0.05 , t 1 , p .40 .
Turning to Study 1b , a similar pattern of results emerged ( see right-hand column in Table 2 ) .
The overall model was significant , R2 .23 , F ( 14 , 115 ) 2.43 , p .005 .
The control variables in Step 1 did not explain a significant proportion of the variance , R .023 , F ( 3 , 115 ) 1.19 , ns .
However , the main effects in Step 2 did , R2 .09 , F ( 5 , 115 ) 2.81 , p .020 .
This was due to job autonomy .
Step 3 explained a significant proportion of the variance , R2 .09 , F ( 6 , 115 ) 3.26 , p .025 .
Table 2 shows that this is due to the significant interactions among job autonomy and self-concern , and among skill variety and self-concern .
Figure 2 ( top panel ) shows that among employees with high self-concern , increases in job autonomy associ- ate with higher supervisor ratings of job performance , B 0.93 , t 3.13 , p .001 .
When employees are low in self-concern , there is no relationship between job autonomy and job performance , B 0.19 , Table 1 Descriptive Statistics ( Studies 1a–1b ) Variable M1a SD1a M1b SD1b 1a 1b 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 .
Self-concern 3.67 0.62 3.11 0.69 .81 .82 — .25 .04 .07 .02 .04 2 .
Other-orientation 3.86 0.63 2.97 0.63 .79 .87 .37 — .09 .06 .05 .10 3 .
Feedback 3.88 0.38 4.32 0.22 .69 .69 .26 .33 — .14 .21 .01 4 .
Skill variety 3.24 0.79 3.66 0.49 .78 .83 .32 .10 .02 — .02 .02 5 .
Job autonomy 3.94 0.81 3.21 0.53 .81 .79 .46 .38 .38 .21 — .26 6 .
Job performancea 5.05 0.56 2.11 0.87 .76 .90 .15 .19 .29 .06 .25 — Note .
N 144 in Study 1a ; N 129 in Study 1b .
Correlations in Study 1a are below the diagonal ; correlations in Study 1b are above the diagonal .
a Supervisor ratings .
p .10. p .05. p .01 .
917SELF-INTEREST AND OTHER-ORIENTATION t 1 , p .65 .
Figure 2 ( bottom panel ) shows that , likewise , as skill variety increases , job performance is higher among employees with high self-concern , B 0.69 , t 2.18 , p .031 .
When employees are low in self-concern , skill variety did not predict job performance , B 0.23 , t 1 , p .53 .
Together , across both studies there is support for the SCOOM hypothesis that job attributes such as autonomy and skill variety predict performance better among employees with high self-concern than among employees with low self-concern .
That effects for feed- back were not moderated by self-concern may be due to restriction of range , which reduces the likelihood of detecting moderators ( also see Table 1 ) .
In general , and also consistent with SCOOM , other- orientation did not interact with job attributes ( the exception being the interaction with skill variety in Study 1a , but this was not replicated in Study 1b ) .
Thus , overall , Studies 1a and 1b provide good support for the SCOOM hypothesis .
It is important to emphasize that although self-concern has a similar moderating effect as growth need strength in Hackman and Oldham ’ s ( 1975 ) model on job characteristics , growth need strength and self- concern are not the same , and the mechanisms underlying their moderating effect may be quite different ( see also Footnote 2 ) .
Future work is needed to more fully uncover the similarities and differences between self-concern and growth need strength .
Here at least we can conclude that apart from providing new evidence for some of the main effect predictions in Hackman and Oldham ’ s model , Study 1 contrib- utes the new insight that variations in other-orientation do not mod- erate the relationship between job characteristics and work perfor- mance .
Although not part of the job characteristics model , it is consistent with the SCOOM hypothesis .
Study 2 : Other-Orientation Moderates Climate–Prosocial Behavior Relations Study 1 did not provide a test of the notion that other-orientation moderates the impact of group-level rather than individual-level attributes and characteristics .
It is precisely this notion that was the focus of Study 2 .
Whereas the SCOOM hypothesis and related notions—such as the TOO—have been tested , thus far with regard Table 2 Regression of Job Performance on Job Attributes , Self-Concern ( SC ) , Other-Orientation ( OO ) , and Their Interactions ( Studies 1a–1b ) Step Study 1a Study 1b B t R2 B t R2 Step 1 Age 0.002 1 .01 0.21 1.19 .023 Gender 0.06 1 0.06 1 Job tenure 0.00 6 1 0.03 1.56 Step 2 SC 0.04 1 .12 0.03 1 .10 OO 0.03 1 0.00 1 Feedback 0.16 2.50 0.44 1.19 Skill variety 0.02 1 0.22 1.06 Job autonomy 0.14 1.96 0.86 2.89 Step 3 Feedback OO 0.03 1 .12 0.67 1.01 .09 Skill Variety OO 0.22 2.68 0.40 1 Job Autonomy OO 0.09 1 0.53 1.22 Feedback SC 0.07 1 0.10 1 Skill Variety SC 0.20 2.40 0.87 1.85 Job Autonomy SC 0.21 1.96 1.15 2.33 Note .
N 144 in Study 1a ; N 129 in Study 1b .
p .05. p .01 .
2 2,5 3 3,5 4 4,5 5 low high job autonomy w or k pe rf or m an ce Hi Self- Concern Lo Self- Concern 2 2,5 3 3,5 4 4,5 5 low high skill variety w or k pe rf or m an ce Hi Self- Concern Lo Self- Concern Figure 2 .
Regression of job autonomy ( top panel ) and skill variety ( bottom panel ) on task-performance for individuals with high ( Hi ; 1 SD ) versus low ( Lo ; 1 SD ) self-concern in Study 1b .
918 DE DREU AND NAUTA to job attitudes ( Meglino & Korsgaard , 2007 ) and job performance ( current Study 1 ) , the model has implications for other forms of organizational behavior as well .
One example is prosocial behavior at work .
Often seen as a form of organizational citizenship behav- ior , prosocial behavior at work is discretionary and voluntary in that it is not explicated in a job contract ( Borman & Motowidlow , 1993 ) .
It encompasses a range of activities , including helping coworkers ( e.g. , calling attention to a potential error , sharing supplies ) , protecting the organization ( e.g. , reporting a fire hazard , alerting security to a suspicious individual ) , and spreading good- will ( e.g. , telling friends about how happy one is to work for one ’ s company ; George & Brief , 1992 ) .
Prosocial behavior is a function of many different variables , some residing at the individual level and some residing at the group level ( Penner , Dovidio , Piliavin , & Schroeder , 2005 ) .4 Of particular interest in the current context is recent work demonstrat- ing that prosocial behavior at work is positively related to the justice climate within the employee ’ s work unit or organization .
Justice climate is defined as a cognition regarding how fairly people within one ’ s team , unit , or organization are treated ( Colquitt et al. , 2002 ; Mossholder , Bennett , & Martin , 1998 ; Naumann & Bennett , 2000 ; Roberson , 2006 ) .
Consistent with the relational model of justice ( Lind & Tyler , 1988 ) , work has shown that the more employees perceive others being treated just and with respect and dignity , the more inclined they are to perform prosocial behavior ( e.g. , Ehrhart , 2004 ; Liao & Rupp , 2005 ; Nau- mann & Bennett , 2000 ) .
However , in terms of the SCOOM hy- pothesis , this relationship between perceived justice climate and prosocial behavior should be stronger among employees with high rather than low other-orientation .
When other-orientation is high , employees are particularly likely to attend to and process the way others are treated , and thus they are more likely to be influenced by it.5 Method Participants and procedure .
We employed the same proce- dure as in Study 1b , except that employees and supervisors in the service industry were approached .
A total of 287 employees and their direct supervisors were invited to participate .
Counting only those in which both employee and supervisor responded , the total response rate was 45 % ( N 128 employees [ 63 men ] , and N 128 supervisors [ 85 men ] ) .
The employees averaged 42 years of age ( SD 9.21 ) , and 37 % had a university degree .
They had an average job tenure of 6 months ( SD 3.21 ) , and they worked with their direct supervisor for an average of 3.22 months ( SD 3.11 ) .
Materials .
Self-concern and other-orientation were measured as before ( Cronbach ’ s s .79 ) .
Perceived justice climate was assessed with five items based on past work on justice climate ( e.g. , “ key players in this organization are open and trustworthy ” ; “ colleagues and supervisors are honest and fair ” ; and “ people in this organization are fairly treated ” ; 1 fully disagree , 5 fully agree ; .79 ) .
Prosocial behavior was assessed by asking supervisors to rate their employee on four items derived from Moorman and Blakely ( 1995 ) , including ( 1 ) “ voluntarily do things beyond call of duty ” ; ( 2 ) “ help colleagues to solve work-related problems ” ; and ( 3 ) “ serve and protect the reputation of our orga- nization ” ( 1 not at all , 5 certainly ) .
As before , principal component analysis and confirmatory factor analysis supported discriminant validity ; Carsten K. W. De Dreu can provide more detail .
Results Treatment of the data and descriptive statistics .
Occasional missing values were replaced by the scale mean .
Table 3 shows that self-concern and other-orientation were not correlated but that they both were moderately correlated with perceived justice cli- mate .
Interestingly , perceived justice climate , self-concern , and other-orientation were not correlated with supervisor reports of prosocial behavior .
Test of hypotheses .
The analytical procedure was the same as before ; control variables were employee ’ s age , gender , job tenure , and weekly working hours .
Results revealed a marginally signif- icant overall regression model , R2 .10 , F ( 7 , 120 ) 1.72 , p .10 ( see also Table 4 ) .
Neither the control variables in Step 1 nor the main effects in Step 2 accounted for a significant proportion of the variance , R2 .021 , F ( 2 , 120 ) 1.42 , p .24 , and R2 .03 , F ( 3 , 120 ) 1.78 , p .16 , respectively .
This notwithstanding , inspection of the regression weights showed that other-orientation related positively to supervisor ratings of prosocial behavior , B 0.21 , t 2.26 , p .025 .
Furthermore , the interactions between perceived justice climate , self-concern , and other-orientation en- tered in Step 3 explained additional variance , R2 .05 , F ( 2 , 120 ) 3.37 , p .05 .
Inspection of the regression weights in Table 4 revealed a nonsignificant effect from the Self-Concern Per- ceived Justice Climate interaction , B 0.06 , t 1 , ns , and a significant Other-Orientation Justice Climate interaction , B 0.39 , t 2.37 , p .025 .
Figure 3 shows that perceived justice climate predicted prosocial behavior among employees with high other-orientation , B 0.25 , t 2.15 , p .033 , but not among employees with low other-orientation , B 0.19 , t 1.07 , ns .
Study 3 : Job Characteristics , Justice Climate , and Personal Initiative Studies 1 and 2 support the SCOOM hypothesis , and the evi- dence is consistent across different samples , measures , and meth- ods .
However , a limitation is that in each case , a study provided positive evidence for only part of the model .
In essence , however , the SCOOM hypothesis holds that work behavior is a function of 4 Because prosocial behavior may or may not serve personal interests , it may or may not be driven by such self-concerns .
Thus , people may perform prosocial acts because it somehow serves their personal interests and/or because they “ simply can , ” because they feel morally compelled , or be- cause they are genuinely concerned with the potential beneficiaries .
As such , one may expect a positive relationship between self-concern and prosocial behavior , as well as a positive relationship between other- orientation and prosocial behavior .
5 It may be important to distinguish between individual perceptions of features and characteristics of their group , work unit , or organization on the one hand , and the shared perceptions within a group , work unit , or organization of these group attributes on the other ( Kozlowski & Klein , 2000 ) .
Whereas the SCOOM hypothesis applies , in principle , to both individual perceptions of the group and shared representations of group attributes , only the former is presently examined .
The analytic focus here thus is at the individual level , and conclusions do not necessarily generalize to group-level ( or cross-level ) influences .
919SELF-INTEREST AND OTHER-ORIENTATION both individual attributes ( such as job characteristics ) and group attributes ( such as perceived justice climate ) .
We designed Study 3 to test the hypothesis in full .
In addition , we focused on a criterion that is intermediate between job performance and proso- cial behavior , namely personal initiative ( Frese & Fay , 2001 ) .
Personal initiative is defined as proactive , self-starting , persisting behaviors that workers enact to achieve work goals ( Frese & Fay , 2001 ) .
Taking initiatives may lead to better working conditions , better functioning machineries , and more efficient work processes , which should facilitate job performance .
Indeed , there is reason to expect job characteristics to relate to the emergence of personal initiative .
Fay and Kamps ( 2006 ) used data from more than 300 individuals on perceptions of work characteristics ( job control , complexity , task completeness , prescription of one-best-way of doing the job ) and found that individuals who held jobs charac- terized by high complexity , task completeness , and control dis- played more personal initiative .
Along similar lines , one could argue that jobs characterized by high skill variety and high job autonomy are more likely to give rise to personal initiatives than jobs lacking these motivating characteristics .
In other words , we expected personal initiative to be a positive function of skill variety and job autonomy .
However , in keeping with the SCOOM hypothesis , we also expected these relations to be stronger for individuals with high self-concern .
Personal initiative is not only a function of individual-level attributes , such as job characteristics .
Consistent with Study 2 , and the idea that perceived justice climate not only motivates prosocial behavior but also task-performance ( Colquitt et al. , 2002 ) , we expected personal initiative to be a function of perceived justice climate ( cf .
Rhoades & Eisenberger , 2002 ) .
However , our SCOOM hypothesis further suggests that the positive relationship between perceived justice climate and personal initiative should be stronger among employees with high , rather than with low , other- orientation .
Method Participants and procedure .
We approached by e-mail a total of 1,534 members of the PanelClix online research panel ( see Study 1 ) and asked them to participate in a research funded by TNO ( Netherlands Institute for Applied Research ) to examine HR practices and self-management .
After 1 week , a reminder was sent to 404 members who had not opened the link .
Three weeks later , 1,043 members had filled out the questionnaire ( 68 % response ) .
We excluded those whose job was described as “ freelancer ” or “ self-employed , ” who had more than 10 % missing values , or who fell two standard deviations below the average time-on-task ( thus completing the survey exceedingly fast ) .
The final sample size was N 854 ( 415 men ) .
Age ranged between 20 and 64 years , with 78 % of the sample being between 25 and 54 years of age .
Over 26 % had a university degree , 51 % had received vocational train- ing , and the remaining 23 % had received lower level ( mostly technical or administrative ) training .
The majority of the respon- dents ( 78 % ) had a tenured position , and 20 % had managerial responsibilities .
The type of jobs involved included production ( 17 % ) , administration ( 28 % ) , sales-related activity ( 15 % ) , or pol- icy consulting and research ( 8 % ) .
Of the members , 50 % worked in organizations with more than 100 employees .
Materials .
All materials were the same as before , except the assessment of personal initiative , which was modeled after Fay and Kamps ( 2006 ) .
The scale has eight items , including “ I immediately take initiatives , even when my colleagues don ’ t do so ” ; “ I am actively searching for possibilities to improve my work situation ” ; and “ I tend to do more than is required of me ” ( 1 not at all , 5 very much so ) .
1 1,5 2 2,5 3 low high perc .
justice climate pr o- so ci al b eh av io r Hi Other- Orient Lo Other- Orient Figure 3 .
Regression of prosocial behavior on perceived ( perc . )
justice climate when other-orientation ( Other-Orient ) is high ( Hi ; 1 SD ) versus low ( Lo ; 1 SD ) in Study 2 .
Table 3 Descriptive Statistics ( Study 2 ) Variable M SD 1 2 3 4 1 .
Self-concern 2.98 0.81 .80 2 .
Other-orientation 3.11 0.76 .06 .83 3 .
Perceived justice climate 4.00 0.87 .28 .27 .79 4 .
Prosocial behaviora 3.71 0.74 .07 .06 .04 .76 Note .
Scale reliabilities ( Cronbach ’ s alphas ) are on the diagonal ; N 128. a Supervisor ratings .
p .01 .
Table 4 Regression of Prosocial Behavior on Perceived Justice Climate ( PJC ) , Self-Concern ( SC ) , Other-Orientation ( OO ) , and Their Interactions ( Study 2 ) Step B t R2 Step 1 .02 Gender 0.36 1.64 Age 0.01 1 Tenure 0.04 1 Working hours per week 0.01 1 Step 2 .03 SC 0.14 1.34 OO 0.21 2.26 PJC 0.01 1 Step 3 .05 PJC SC 0.06 1 PJC OO 0.39 2.37 Note .
N 128. p .10. p .025 .
920 DE DREU AND NAUTA Results and Discussion Descriptive statistics .
Table 5 gives the descriptive statistics and zero-order correlations .
Given the large sample size , most correlations are significant .
However , focusing on those of at least moderate strength ( r .30 ) shows that self-concern and other- orientation are moderately correlated , and that both concerns are positively related to both individual-level job characteristics and to perceived justice climate .
This confirms the patterns found before .
Also , both predictor variables ( job autonomy , skill variety , and justice climate ) and moderator variables ( self-concern and other- orientation ) are positively related to personal initiative .
Impor- tantly , correlations are moderate at best , indicating that common- method variance is not a critical problem ( Spector , 2006 ) .
Hypotheses tests .
We expected that personal initiative is a function of job autonomy and skill variety , especially among employees with high self-concern ( Studies 1a–1b ) , and of justice climate , especially among employees with high other-orientation ( Study 2 ) .
A moderated multiple regression was computed , with personal initiative as the dependent variable .
In Step 1 , we entered control variables ( gender , age , time-on-task ) , and in Step 2 , we entered main effects for job autonomy , skill variety , justice cli- mate , self-concern , and other-orientation .
In Step 3 , we entered the interactions among job autonomy and self-concern , skill variety and self-concern , and justice climate and self-concern , as well as the interactions among job autonomy and other-orientation , skill variety and other-orientation , and justice climate and other- orientation .
( As before , we explored the effects of further adding higher order interactions , but this did not influence results . )
The overall regression model explained a significant amount of variance in personal initiative , R2 .51 , F ( 14 , 840 ) 61.79 , p .001 .
The control variables in Step 1 explained some variance , R2 .005 , F ( 3 , 840 ) 2.85 , p .05 : Longer time-on-task was associated with lower scores on personal initiative .
Step 2 ex- plained additional variance , R2 .459 , F ( 5 , 840 ) 156.45 , p .001 .
Table 6 shows that except for justice climate , all other main effects were positively and significantly related to personal initia- tive .
Consistent with our findings in Study 2 , the interactions with self-concern and other-orientation in Step 3 led to a significant increase in explained variance , R2 .02 , F ( 6 , 840 ) 3.16 , p .005 .
Table 6 shows that personal initiative is a function of the interaction between job autonomy and self-concern , and between skill variety and self-concern , but not of the interaction between justice climate and self-concern .
Figure 4 ( top panel ) shows that job autonomy was related to personal initiative more when em- ployees were high in self-concern , B 0.61 , t 6.13 , p .001 , than when they were low in self-concern , B 0.21 , t 2.36 , p .018 .
Likewise , Figure 4 ( bottom panel ) shows that skill variety was related to personal initiative more when employees were high in self-concern , B 0.35 , t 11.45 , p .001 , than when they were low in self-concern , B 0.18 , t 1.69 , p .10 .
Table 6 shows that other-orientation did not moderate the effects of job autonomy and of skill variety .
However , the interaction between perceived justice climate and other-orientation was sig- nificant—Figure 5 shows that perceived justice climate related to personal initiative among people high in other-orientation , B 0.07 , t 2.46 , p .014 , but not among those low in other- orientation , B 0.003 , t 1 , ns .
Taken together , the results of Study 3 provide new support for the SCOOM hypothesis .
We found that self-concern moderates the relationship between job characteristics and personal initiative , and that other-orientation moderates the relationship between per- ceived justice climate and personal initiative .
Most important is , however , that we showed these relationships within one and the Table 5 Descriptive Statistics ( Study 3 ) Variable M SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 .
Self-concern 3.11 0.79 .82 2 .
Other-orientation 2.89 0.76 .34 .76 3 .
Job autonomy 3.46 1.07 .23 .22 .73 4 .
Skill variety 3.75 0.98 .33 .43 .35 .81 5 .
Perceived justice climate 4.14 0.98 .10 .30 .25 .39 .77 6 .
Personal initiative 3.88 0.72 .45 .49 .39 .60 .25 .76 Note .
Scale reliabilities ( Cronbach ’ s alphas ) are on the diagonal ; correlations .12 are significant at p .001 ( N 854 ) .
Table 6 Regression of Personal Initiative on Job Attributes , Perceived Justice Climate ( PJC ) , Self-Concern ( SC ) , Other-Orientation ( OO ) , and Their Interactions ( Study 3 ) Step B t R2 Step 1 .005 Gender 0.036 1 Age 0.27 1.69 Time-on-task 0.13 2.23 Step 2 .46 SC 0.17 6.52 OO 0.24 8.17 Job autonomy 0.11 5.88 Skill variety 0.29 12.81 PJC 0.04 1.58 Step 3 .011 Job Autonomy SC 0.06 2.53 Skill Variety SC 0.08 2.64 PJC SC 0.02 1 Job Autonomy OO 0.01 1 Skill Variety OO 0.04 1.61 PJC OO 0.05 1.97 Note .
N 854. p .10. p .05. p .025 .
921SELF-INTEREST AND OTHER-ORIENTATION same sample , thus supporting our contention that one construct ( e.g. , personal initiative ) may be a function of both individual-level attributes ( when self-concern is high ) and of group-level attributes ( when other-orientation is high ) .
Conclusions and General Discussion With self-interest and self-concern being such powerful and omnipresent motivational drivers of human endeavors , we may sometimes overlook that other equally powerful motives , including other-orientation , play a role as well .
This notwithstanding , many theories and models of work behavior incorporate , one way or the other , the idea that human behavior is driven by self-concern as well as by broader concerns , including other-orientation ( Blake & Mouton , 1964 ; Deci & Ryan , 1985 ; De Dreu , 2006 ; Meglino & Korsgaard , 2004 ) .
In the present article , we built on previous analyses around motivated information processing ( e.g. , De Dreu et al. , 2008 ) and developed and tested the SCOOM hypothesis .
Our studies support five core propositions : ( 1 ) self-concern and other- orientation are independent constructs ; ( 2 ) variation in self- concern moderates the relationship between individual-level at- tributes such as job characteristics on the one hand , and task performance and personal initiative on the other ; ( 3 ) variation in other-orientation does not moderate the effects of these variables ; 6 ( 4 ) variation in other-orientation moderates the relationship be- tween group-level attributes such as perceived justice climate on the one hand , and prosocial behavior and personal initiative on the other ; and ( 5 ) variation in self-concern does not moderate the effects of these variables .
Implications for Theory and Avenues for Future Research Our first proposition was that self-concern and other-orientation are independent and orthogonal dimensions .
First , as we have been harping on , self-concern moderates effects not influenced by other- orientation , and vice versa .
Second , across studies we found weak to moderate correlations between these two measures .
This may reflect a social desirability tendency for people to rate other- orientation higher than it really is .
However , close inspection of the means and standard deviations for other-orientation shows it is not much higher than those for self-concern , which renders a social desirability bias somewhat less plausible .
In fact , it may well be that across work settings people see their own personal goals to be moderately and positively linked to those of their colleagues , and to some extent the positive correlation between self-concern and other-orientation may reflect either enlightened self-interest , gen- uine concern for one ’ s colleagues , or some combination .
In addi- tion , the positive correlation may point to the presence of some latent variable , most likely something similar to “ level of engage- ment. ” Further work would be useful to fully understand the meaning of this relationship .
To understand when and why self-concern and other-orientation do correlate , either positively or negatively , Deutsch ’ s ( 1973 ) theory of cooperation and competition may provide a useful start- ing point .
In this theory , a distinction is made between three types of goal interdependence .
People may perceive own and other ’ s goals to be positively linked , in which case a positive correlation between self-concern and other-orientation is to be expected .
Al- ternatively , people may perceive own and other ’ s goals to be negatively linked , in which case a negative correlation between self-concern and other-orientation is to be expected .
Finally , peo- ple may perceive own and other ’ s goals to be independent , in which case no correlation between self-concern and other- orientation is to be expected .
Positive goal interdependence , or cooperation , is more likely when there are collective rather than personal incentives , when there is a cooperative climate , when there are abundant resources , when people expect to work together in the future , and so on .
Negative goal interdependence , or com- petition , is more likely when there are personal , or even relative incentives ( as in “ grading on the curve ” ) , when there is a compet- itive climate , when there is resource scarcity , and so on .
6 The exception was a significant interaction between skill variety and other-orientation in Study 1a .
This interaction effect was not predicted or replicated in Study 1b or Study 3 and , thus , most likely was due to a Type I error .
3 3,2 3,4 3,6 3,8 4 4,2 4,4 4,6 4,8 5 low high job autonomy pe rs on al in iti at iv e Hi Self- Concern Lo Self- Concern 3 3,5 4 4,5 5 low high skill variety pe rs on al in iti at iv e Hi Self- Concern Lo Self- Concern Figure 4 .
Regression of personal initiative on job autonomy ( top panel ) and skill variety ( bottom panel ) when self-concern is high ( Hi ; 1 SD ) versus low ( Lo ; 1 SD ) in Study 3 .
3 3,5 4 4,5 5 low high perc .
justice climate pe rs on al in iti at iv e Hi Other- Orient Lo Other- Orient Figure 5 .
Regression of personal initiative on perceived ( perc . )
justice climate when other-orientation ( Other Orient ) is high ( Hi ; 1 SD ) versus low ( Lo ; 1 SD ) in Study 3 .
922 DE DREU AND NAUTA Two other issues with regard to self-concern and other- orientation require some attention .
First , we argued that each concern could be both trait-based and state-based .
In the current studies , however , we measured self-concern and other-orientation without knowing whether these measures tap into short-lived states , more enduring traits , or some combination .
Clearly , more research is needed to settle this issue , although the above discus- sion of Deutsch ’ s ( 1973 ) theory of interdependence structures suggests that self-concern and other-orientation may at least refer to states at work .
Second , we did not deal with the long-standing question whether other-orientation is , in the final analysis , nothing more than instrumental to self-interest or , alternatively , an end- state in and of itself .
Answering this question is beyond the scope of this article and perhaps even beyond our skill and ability .
Without denying its importance , we wish to note that with regard to the SCOOM hypothesis , the question is of lesser relevance .
The present studies , along with many others , clearly show that other- orientation matters and has effects different from those triggered by self-concern .
Future research could investigate , however , whether other-orientation stemming from instrumental self- concern has similar , or different , effects than other-orientation less clearly tied to instrumental self-concern ( Gillespie & Greenberg , 2005 ; Turillo , Folger , Lavelle , Umphress , & Gee , 2002 ) .
Our propositions were well supported by our data and have several implications for core theories in organizational psychol- ogy .
First of all , we add to the job characteristic model and related notions by showing that the motivating effect of job characteristics is particularly strong when employees are self-concerned ( Lang- fred & Moye , 2004 ; Meglino & Korsgaard , 2007 ) .
Importantly , however , Studies 1 and 3 also revealed that other-orientation has little to do with the motivating effect of job characteristics .
Put differently , we now know why task autonomy and skill variety are not the answer for everyone .
If organizations wish to benefit from investments in job enrichment , they need to increase employee self-concern and concomitant focus on self-relevant information .
Second , we add to accumulating work on justice climate by show- ing that it matters more to those employees with high rather than low other-orientation , and that variations in self-concern have little to do with the relationship between justice climate and , for exam- ple , prosocial behavior at work .
If organizations wish to increase prosocial behavior among their employees , they may achieve this by establishing a climate in which people are treated fairly and with respect .
However , our results show that such interventions are particularly likely to affect those employees with high other- orientation .
Models of work behavior assuming either self-interest , or other- orientation , are too narrow and only address half of the picture .
Our results clarify that at work both self-concern and other- orientation play a role , albeit in varying degrees across individuals and situations .
Task-performance , prosocial behavior , and personal initiative are a function of ( a ) individual-level attributes , such as job characteristics when employees are high in self-concern , and ( b ) group-level attributes , such as justice climate when employees are high in other-orientation .
We believe that the SCOOM hypoth- esis adds to what practitioners often come across when they try to implement measures based on OB studies , such as granting em- ployees more task autonomy or implementing self-managing teams .
Often these organizational changes fail and meet with unexpected problems .
For example , the implementation of self- managing teams often fails and employees continue working alone and individually .
Resistance to change and poor implementation procedures may provide viable explanations for such failures .
However , it may well be that implementing team work fails because a majority of employees score low on other-orientation and hence they do not benefit from these group-level interventions .
Thus , Grant ( 2008 ) showed that the effects of task significance ( an individual-level job characteristic ) can be bolstered by explicit reference to the job ’ s social consequences to other people .
This works , however , for people with prosocial values more than for those who lack such values .
TOO and Motivated Information Processing At the outset , we mentioned some differences between the SCOOM hypothesis and the TOO developed by Meglino and his colleagues ( e.g. , Meglino & Korsgaard , 2004 , 2007 ) .
First , the current perspective assumes that self-concern and other-orientation are independent constructs , whereas the TOO assumes these two to be antagonistic ( at least in most situations ; see Meglino & Kors- gaard , 2007 ) .
We believe the current research , as well as other work ( for a review , see De Dreu , 2006 ) , favors an independence assumption .
Second , and more important , is that the SCOOM hypothesis assumes self-concern but not other-orientation to mod- erate relationships between individual-level variables such as job attributes on the one hand , and task motivation and performance on the other .
The TOO assumes , however , that it is other-orientation that moderates this relationship , and research seems to support this proposition ( e.g. , Korsgaard et al. , 1996 ; Meglino & Korsgaard , 2007 ) .
As mentioned , this research relied on ipsative methods in which self-concern and other-orientation are necessarily traded- off , and any evidence for ( higher ) other-orientation as moderator could be interpreted as equally sound evidence for ( lower ) self- concern as moderator ( De Dreu , 2006 ) .
At the very least , the current research renders more plausible the latter interpretation .
The SCOOM hypothesis derives in part from work on moti- vated information processing in groups ( De Dreu et al. , 2008 ) .
Core in this work is the idea that social motives drive informa- tion processing and search .
Self-concern and other-orientation combine into particular social motives— high self-concern with low other-orientation is typically referred to as a proself moti- vation , and a high self-concern with high other-orientation is typically referred to as prosocial motivation ( De Dreu , 2006 ; De Dreu et al. , 2008 ; Van Lange , 1999 ) .
A critical assumption in studies on motivated information processing is that related con- structs—such as in ( ter ) dependent self-construal , individualism– collectivism , and dispositional agreeableness—all have the same biasing effect on information search and processing .
The cur- rent study can neither support nor disconfirm this core idea , and future work is needed to see whether these related constructs indeed drive individuals toward or away from individual-level or group-level attributes and cues .
Such future work could additionally examine whether self-concern and other- orientation explain variance over and beyond these related constructs .
If true , SCOOM may turn out to be an important building block in a more general theory of ( social ) motivation in work settings .
923SELF-INTEREST AND OTHER-ORIENTATION Study Limitations and Conclusions Across studies , we surveyed a large number of employees and their supervisors coming from a variety of industries ( e.g. , health care , service industry , public administration , and governance ) and performing a great number of different jobs .
With the exception of typical “ blue-collar ” work and production jobs , we obtained a fairly representative sample of the ( Dutch ) working force .
This means that our conclusions are relatively context-free and should not be taken as informing us about typical jobs or industries .
Three issues constrain our conclusions .
First of all , common- source variance provides a validity threat in Study 3 .
However , because the main findings closely correspond to those of the other three studies , in which we used data from multiple sources , common-source variance seems an unlikely alternative explana- tion in this particular case .
Second , there is the issue of common- method variance—we assessed all independent and dependent variables using the same method .
However , we took care in using validated and reliable measures , and zero-order correlations among critical constructs were small to moderate , which is generally taken as evidence against common-method variance .
Finally , common- method variance provides a more serious validity threat to conclu- sions about main effects than to conclusions about interaction effects .
In fact , common-method variance undermines the possi- bility to detect interaction effects ( G. H. McClelland & Judd , 1993 ) .
Thus , although we can not exclude common-method vari- ance as a validity threat , we built in a number of mitigating factors ( Spector , 2006 ) and note that our focus on interactions reduces this concern .
Second , the proportion of variance explained across studies was rather small .
One explanation is that we used heterogeneous sam- ples of employees in a variety of functions and roles .
Relatedly , testing for interaction effects in regression analysis is a rather conservative approach , which may also have contributed to the relatively small proportion of variance being explained ( see , e.g. , G. H. McClelland & Judd , 1993 ) .
Third , it can not be excluded that self-concern and other-orientation do in fact explain a significant but small amount of variance in the various relationships that we studied .
Obviously , this begs the question about relevance— although we have an empirically supported theory , other interven- tions may be much more powerful .
It is important to note , how- ever , that our theoretical perspective was not developed to design system interventions but , instead , to better understand when and why employees are , or are not , influenced by situational cues regarding the jobs they perform , the group they work in , and so on .
We thus were not interested in uncovering the most powerful intervention to combat low work motivation , or lack of personal initiative , or unacceptably low levels of prosocial behavior .
Our theoretical perspective is , however , potentially useful in fine- tuning interventions that appear less successful than desired .
Third , the cross-sectional designs we employed prohibit causal inferences and permit alternative explanations in terms of third variables .
Although we included control variables ( age , gender , job tenure ) in the reported analyses , and in some studies we explored ( but did not report ) the possible influence of other factors such as type of job and organizational size , new research is needed to address specific third variables .
To make causal and directional inferences , experimental designs are needed .
The current support for the SCOOM hypothesis with employees from a large variety of organizations performing different jobs provides a sound basis for such experiments to be designed , and we see this as an important direction for new research on the SCOOM hypothesis .
Concluding Thoughts In principle , the SCOOM hypothesis applies to all individual- level attributes and to all group-level attributes ( for a review , see Chen & Kanfer , 2006 ) .
We would expect the VIE model of work motivation ( Vroom , 1964 ) to have greater predictive validity among employees high rather than low in self-concern .
We would also expect social-information processing accounts of job satisfac- tion ( e.g. , Salancik & Pfeffer , 1977 ) to have greater predictive validity among employees high rather than low in other- orientation .
These possibilities notwithstanding , the studies support three general conclusions .
First , self-concern is conceptually and empir- ically different from other-orientation .
Second , self-concern mod- erates the effects of individual-level variables , such as job char- acteristics on work behavior .
Third , other-orientation moderates the effects of group-level variables , such as perceived justice climate on work behavior .
Thus , an exclusive focus on self- concern and self-interest leads to incomplete theories in organiza- tional psychology .
Including other , broader concerns , such as other-orientation , is less parsimonious but leads to a more accurate and sophisticated understanding of all kinds of work-related be- haviors , including task performance , prosocial behavior , and per- sonal initiative .
It allows for theoretical integration , and it provides tools for understanding , directing , and improving system design and organizational interventions .
References Batson , C. D. ( 1998 ) .
Altruism and prosocial behavior .
In D. T. Gilbert , S. T. Fiske , & G. Lindzey ( Eds .
) , The handbook of social psychology ( Vol .
2 , 4th ed. , pp .
282–316 ) .
New York : McGraw-Hill .
Blake , R. , & Mouton , J. S. ( 1964 ) .
The managerial grid .
Houston , TX : Gulf .
Borman , W. C. , & Motowidlow , S. J .
( 1993 ) .
Expanding the criterion domain to include elements of contextual performance .
In N. Schmitt & W. Borman ( Eds .
) , Personnel selection in organizations ( pp .
71–98 ) .
New York : Jossey-Bass .
Brewer , M. B. , & Kramer , R. M. ( 1986 ) .
Choice behavior in social dilemmas : Effects of social identity , group size , and decision framing .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 50 , 543–549 .
Camac , C. ( 1992 ) .
Information preferences in a two-person social di- lemma .
In W. B. G. Liebrand , D. M. Messick , & H. A. M. Wilke ( Eds .
) , Social dilemmas : Theoretical issues and research findings ( pp .
147– 161 ) .
Elmsford , NY : Pergamon .
Chen , G. , & Kanfer , R. ( 2006 ) .
Toward a systems theory of motivated behavior in work teams .
Research in Organizational Behavior , 27 , 223–267 .
Colquitt , J .
A. , Noe , R. A. , & Jackson , C. J .
( 2002 ) .
Justice in teams : Antecedents and consequences of procedural justice climate .
Personnel Psychology , 55 , 83–109 .
Cropanzano , R. , Goldman , B. , & Folger , R. ( 2005 ) .
Self-interest : Defining and understanding a human motive .
Journal of Organizational Behavior , 26 , 985–991 .
Davis , M. H. ( 1983 ) .
Measuring individual differences in empathy : Evi- dence for a multidimensional approach .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 44 , 113–129 .
924 DE DREU AND NAUTA Deci , E. L. , & Ryan , R. M. ( 1985 ) .
Intrinsic motivation and self- determination in human behavior .
New York : Plenum .
De Dreu , C. K. W. ( 2006 ) .
Rational self-interest and other-orientation in organizational behavior : A critical appraisal and extension of Meglino and Korsgaard ( 2004 ) .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 91 , 1245–1252 .
De Dreu , C. K. W. ( 2007 ) .
Cooperative outcome interdependence , task reflexivity and team effectiveness : A motivated information processing approach .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 92 , 628–638 .
De Dreu , C. K. W. , Beersma , B. , Stroebe , K. , & Euwema , M. C. ( 2006 ) .
Motivated information processing , strategic choice , and the quality of negotiated agreement .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 90 , 927–943 .
De Dreu , C. K. W. , & Boles , T. ( 1998 ) .
Share and share alike or winner take all ?
The influence of social value orientation upon choice and recall of negotiation heuristics .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 76 , 253–276 .
De Dreu , C. K. W. , & Carnevale , P. J .
( 2003 ) .
Motivational bases of information processing and strategy in conflict and negotiation .
In M. P. Zanna ( Ed .
) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol .
35 , pp .
235–291 ) .
New York : Academic Press .
De Dreu , C. K. W. , Nijstad , B .
A. , & Van Knippenberg , D. ( 2008 ) .
Motivated information processing in group judgment and decision mak- ing .
Personality and Social Psychology Review , 12 , 22–49 .
De Dreu , C. K. W. , Weingart , L. R. , & Kwon , S. ( 2000 ) .
Influence of social motives on integrative negotiation : A meta-analytic review and test of two theories .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 78 , 889– 905 .
Deutsch , M. ( 1973 ) .
The resolution of conflict : Constructive and destruc- tive processes .
New Haven : Yale University Press .
Druckman , D. ( 1994 ) .
Determinants of compromising behavior in negoti- ation .
Journal of Conflict Resolution , 38 , 507–556 .
Ehrhart , M. G. ( 2004 ) .
Leadership and procedural justice climate as ante- cedents of unit-level organizational citizenship behavior .
Personnel Psy- chology , 57 , 61–94 .
Ellemers , N. , De Gilder , D. , & Haslam , S. A .
( 2004 ) .
Motivating individ- uals and groups at work : A social identity perspective on leadership and group performance .
Academy of Management Review , 29 , 459–478 .
Erez , A. , & Isen , A. M. ( 2002 ) .
The influence of positive affect on the components of expectancy motivation .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 87 , 1055–1067 .
Fay , D. , & Kamps , A .
( 2006 ) .
Work characteristics and the emergence of a sustainable workforce : Do job design principles matter ?
Gedrag en Organisatie , 19 , 184–203 .
Ferrero , F. , Pfeffer , J. , & Sutton , R. I .
( 2005 ) .
Economic language and assumptions : How theories can become self-fulfilling .
Academy of Man- agement Review , 30 , 8–24 .
Frese , M. , & Fay , D. ( 2001 ) .
Personal initiative : An active performance concept for work in the 21st century .
In B. M. Staw & R. I. Sutton ( Eds .
) , Research in organizational behavior ( Vol .
23 , pp .
133–187 ) .
Amster- dam : Elsevier .
George , J. M. , & Brief , A. P. ( 1992 ) .
Feeling good-doing good : A con- ceptual analysis of the mood at work–organizational spontaneity rela- tionship .
Psychological Bulletin , 112 , 310–329 .
Giebels , E. , De Dreu , C. K. W. , & Van de Vliert , E. ( 2000 ) .
Interdepen- dence in negotiation : Impact of exit options and social motives on distributive and integrative negotiation .
European Journal of Social Psychology , 30 , 255–272 .
Gillespie , J .
Z. , & Greenberg , J .
( 2005 ) .
Are the goals of organizational justice self-interested ?
In J. Greenberg & J .
A. Colquitt ( Eds .
) , Hand- book of organizational justice ( pp .
179–213 ) .
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum .
Godfrey , P. C. ( 2005 ) .
The relationship between corporate philanthropy and shareholder wealth : A risk management perspective .
Academy of Management Review , 30 , 777–798 .
Grant , A. M. ( 2008 ) .
The significance of task significance : Job perfor- mance effects , relational mechanisms , and boundary conditions .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 93 , 108–124 .
Graziano , W. G. , Jensen-Campbell , L. , & Hair , E. ( 1996 ) .
Perceiving interpersonal conflict and reacting to it : The case for agreeableness .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 70 , 820–835 .
Hackman , J. R. , & Oldham , G. R. ( 1975 ) .
Development of the job diag- nostic survey .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 60 , 159–170 .
Korsgaard , M. A. , Meglino , B. M. , & Lester , S. W. ( 1996 ) .
The effect of other-oriented values on decision making : A test of propositions of a theory of concern for others in organizations .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 68 , 234–245 .
Kozlowski , S. W. J. , & Klein , K. J .
( 2000 ) .
A multilevel approach to theory and research in organizations : Contextual , temporal , and emergent pro- cesses .
In K. J. Klein & S. W. J. Kozlowski ( Eds .
) , Multilevel theory , research , and methods in organizations : Foundations , extensions , and new directions ( pp .
3–90 ) .
San Francisco , CA : Jossey-Bass .
Langfred , C. W. , & Moye , N. A .
( 2004 ) .
Effects of task autonomy on performance : An extended model considering motivational , informa- tional , and structural mechanisms .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 89 , 934–945 .
Liao , H. , & Rupp , D. E. ( 2005 ) .
The impact of justice climate and justice outcomes on work outcomes : A cross-level multifoci framework .
Jour- nal of Applied Psychology , 90 , 242–256 .
Lind , E. A. , & Tyler , T. R. ( 1988 ) .
The social psychology of procedural justice .
New York : Plenum .
Loher , B. T. , Noe , R. A. , Moeller , N. L. , & Fitzgerald , M. P. ( 1985 ) .
A meta-analysis of the relation of job characteristics to job satisfaction .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 70 , 280–289 .
Markus , H. R. , & Kitayama , S. ( 1991 ) .
Culture and the self : Implications for cognition , emotion , and motivation .
Psychological Review , 98 , 224– 253 .
McClelland , D. C. ( 1985 ) .
How motives , skills , and values determine what people do .
American Psychologist , 40 , 812–825 .
McClelland , G. H. , & Judd , C. M. ( 1993 ) .
Statistical difficulties of detect- ing interactions and moderator effects .
Psychological Bulletin , 114 , 376–390 .
Meglino , B. M. , & Korsgaard , M. A .
( 2004 ) .
Considering the rational self-interest as a disposition : Organizational implications of other ori- entation .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 89 , 946–959 .
Meglino , B. M. , & Korsgaard , M. A .
( 2007 ) .
The role of other orientation in reactions to job characteristics .
Journal of Management , 33 , 57–83 .
Miller , D. T. ( 1999 ) .
The norm of self-interest .
American Psychologist , 54 , 1053–1060 .
Moon , H. ( 2001 ) .
The two faces of conscientiousness : Duty and achieve- ment striving in escalation of commitment dilemmas .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 86 , 535–540 .
Moon , H. , Kamdar , D. , Mayer , D. M. , & Takeucki , R. ( 2008 ) .
Me or we ?
The role of personality and justice as other-centered antecedents to innovative citizenship behaviors within organizations .
Journal of Ap- plied Psychology , 93 , 84–94 .
Moorman , R. H. , & Blakely , G. L. ( 1995 ) .
Individualism–collectivism as an individual difference predictor of organizational citizenship behavior .
Journal of Organizational Behavior , 16 , 127–142 .
Mossholder , K. W. , Bennett , N. , & Martin , C. L. ( 1998 ) .
A multilevel analysis of procedural justice context .
Journal of Organizational Behav- ior , 19 , 131–141 .
Naumann , S. E. , & Bennett , N. ( 2000 ) .
A case for procedural justice climate : Development and test of a multilevel model .
Academy of Management Journal , 43 , 881–889 .
Nauta , A. , De Dreu , C. K. W. , & Van der Vaart , T. ( 2002 ) .
Social value orientation , organizational goal concerns and interdepartmental problem solving .
Journal of Organizational Behavior , 23 , 199–213 .
Penner , L. A. , Dovidio , J. F. , Piliavin , J .
A. , & Schroeder , D. A .
( 2005 ) .
925SELF-INTEREST AND OTHER-ORIENTATION Pro-social behavior : Multilevel perspectives .
Annual Review of Psychol- ogy , 56 , 365–392 .
Pfeffer , J. , & Sutton , R. I .
( 2006 ) .
Hard facts , half-truths , and total nonsense .
Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business School Press .
Ravlin , E. C. , & Meglino , B. M. ( 1987 ) .
Effects of values on perception and decision making : A study of alternative work values measures .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 72 , 666–673 .
Rhoades , L. , & Eisenberger , R. ( 2002 ) .
Perceived organizational support : A review of the literature .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 87 , 698–714 .
Roberson , Q. M. ( 2006 ) .
Justice in teams : The effects of interdependence and identification on referent choice and justice climate strength .
Social Justice Research , 19 , 323–344 .
Rocha , H. O. , & Ghoshal , S. ( 2006 ) .
Beyond self-interest revisited .
Journal of Management Studies , 43 , 585–619 .
Rubin , J .
Z. , Pruitt , D. G. , & Kim , S. H. ( 1994 ) .
Social conflict : Escalation , stalemate , and settlement .
New York : McGraw-Hill .
Salancik , G. R. , & Pfeffer , J .
( 1977 ) .
An examination of need-satisfaction models of job attitudes .
Administrative Science Quarterly , 22 , 427–456 .
Solomon , R. C. ( 2004 ) .
Aristotle , ethics , and business organizations .
Or- ganization Studies , 25 , 1021–1043 .
Spector , P. E. ( 1985 ) .
Higher-order need strength as a moderator of the job scope–employee outcome relationship : A meta-analysis .
Journal of Oc- cupational Psychology , 58 , 119–127 .
Spector , P. E. ( 2006 ) .
Method variance in organizational research : Truth or urban legend ?
Organizational Research Methods , 9 , 221–232 .
Tajfel , H. , & Turner , J. C. ( 1979 ) .
An integrative theory of intergroup conflict .
In W. G. Austin & S. Worchel ( Eds .
) , The social psychology of intergroup relations ( pp .
7–24 ) .
Monterey , CA : Brooks/Cole .
Thau , S. , Bennett , R. J. , Stahlberg , D. , & Werner , J. M. ( 2004 ) .
Why should I be generous when I have valued and accessible alternatives ?
Alternative exchange partners and OCB .
Journal of Organizational Behavior , 25 , 607–626 .
Thompson , L. L. ( 1995 ) .
“ They saw a negotiation ” : Partisanship and involvement .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 68 , 839– 853 .
Turillo , C. J. , Folger , R. , Lavelle , J. , Umphress , E. , & Gee , J .
( 2002 ) .
Is virtue its own reward ?
Self-sacrificial decisions for the sake of fairness .
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 89 , 839–865 .
Van Eerde , W. , & Thierry , H. ( 1996 ) .
Vroom ’ s expectancy models and work-related criteria : A meta-analysis .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 81 , 575–586 .
Van Kleef , G. A. , & De Dreu , C. K. W. ( 2002 ) .
Social value orientation and impression formation : A test of two competing hypotheses about information search in negotiation .
International Journal of Conflict Management , 13 , 59–77 .
Van Lange , P. A. M. ( 1999 ) .
The pursuit of joint outcomes and equality in outcomes : An integrative model of social value orientation .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 77 , 337–349 .
Vroom , V. H. ( 1964 ) .
Work and motivation .
New York : Wiley .
Received January 31 , 2008 Revision received September 30 , 2008 Accepted October 7 , 2008 926 DE DREU AND NAUTA
