deraad2008.pdf
akclbbO7ifCvj2eMRTPEzMUNiFgS-deraad2008.pdf.plain.html

A New Taxonomy of Dutch Personality Traits Based on a Comprehensive and Unrestricted List of Descriptors Boele De Raad and Dick P. H. Barelds University of Groningen A list of 2,365 personality descriptive items was selected from a computerized database of the Dutch language .
The list included terms from various word classes , such as trait adjectives , trait nouns , and trait verbs , and from expressions in which the meaning was drawn from a combination of words .
The items were administered to 1,466 participants , who provided self- or other-ratings .
Principal components analyses were performed on both original and ipsatized data .
The data set was split to investigate the invariance of the factors .
The analyses yielded a final 8-factorial structure that included the Big 5 .
Three new trait factors were discovered , namely Virtue , Competence , and Hedonism .
Keywords : trait taxonomy , personality structure , comprehensive list of descriptors Personality trait taxonomies that have exploited everyday lan- guage according to largely similar designs and procedures are available in 15 different cultures or languages,1 both in Indo- European languages—Germanic , Slavic , and Romance—and non- Indo-European languages ( e.g. , Hungarian and Turkish ) .
Twelve of those taxonomies ( which appear italicized in Footnote 1 ) report about support for the so-called Big Five factors , or close versions of them ( Goldberg , 1981 , 1990 ) —Extraversion , Agreeableness , Conscientiousness , Emotional Stability , and Intellect .
Without ex- ception , modern introductory handbooks for personality emphasize the strong consensus that has emerged over the Big Five ( e.g. , Carver & Scheier , 2004 ; Larsen & Buss , 2005 ; Mischel , Shoda , & Smith , 2004 ; Pervin , Cervone , & John , 2005 ) .
In addition , these handbooks summarize criticisms , such as disagreements over la- bels ( Carver & Scheier , 2004 ) , over the comprehensiveness of the Big Five ( Larsen & Buss , 2005 ) , over the relevance of the five factors ( Mischel et al. , 2004 ) , and over the universality of the model ( Pervin et al. , 2005 ) .
Although the Big Five factors have found large adherence , claims for factors beyond the Big Five have been made , both within the psycholexical school ( Almagor , Tellegen , & Waller , 1995 ; Ashton & Lee , 2001 ) and in affiliated contexts ( e.g. , Becker , 1999 ) .
Such claims are of critical importance for furthering trait research and its applications and for the advancement of the descriptive and predictive capacities of personality trait structures ( e.g. , Mershon & Gorsuch , 1988 ) .
Ashton and Lee ( 2001 ) argued in favor of a six-factor structure , including ( close versions of ) the Big Five factors and a factor called Honesty-Humility , represent- ing such traits as honest , sincere , fair , and just , versus dishonest , conceited , and boasting .
Support for the additional sixth factor was observed in Dutch , French , Hungarian , Italian , Korean , Polish , and , although not based on analyses of the original ratings , in German ( Ashton , Lee , Perugini , et al. , 2004 ) .
The Greek trait taxonomy ( Saucier , Georgiades , Tsaousis , & Goldberg , 2005 ) mentioned a factor combining Honesty with Negative Valence aspects ( see Almagor et al. , 1995 ) .
For American English ( Ashton , Lee , & Goldberg , 2004 ) , a sixth factor was named Honesty- Humility , although that factor did not show markers typical of the positive pole ( e.g. , honest ) of Honesty-Humility .
In both Turkish ( Somer & Goldberg , 1999 ) and Croatian ( Mlačić & Ostendorf , 2005 ) , the Honesty-Humility factor did not appear .
Using a so-called nonrestrictive approach with respect to select- ing personality descriptors , Almagor et al .
( 1995 ) produced a Big Seven model in Hebrew that included versions of some of the Big Five factors and two additional factors called Negative Valence ( e.g. , fabricator , envious , and corrupted vs. honest , sincere , and dependable ) and Positive Valence ( e.g. , sophisticated , sharp , and original , vs. mediocre ) .
Given these marker examples , Negative Valence and Positive Valence seem to reflect aspects of Honesty- Humility and Intellect , respectively .
Support for one or both of these factors was found in Spanish ( Benet-Martinez & Waller , 1997 ) , in Filipino ( Church , Katigbak , & Reyes , 1996 ) , and in Greek ( Saucier et al. , 2005 ) .
In the following , we take the Big Five factors as the primary basis of comparison , though much of what is said about what constitutes that model may also apply to the six- and seven-factor models .
1 These studies include American-English ( Saucier & Goldberg , 1996 ) , German ( Ostendorf , 1990 ) , Dutch ( De Raad et al. , 1992 ) , Hungarian ( De Raad & Szirmák , 1994 ) , Italian-1 ( Di Blas & Forzi , 1998 ) , Italian-2 ( Caprara & Perugini , 1994 ) , Czech ( Hrebı́cková , 1995 ) , Hebrew ( Almagor et al. , 1995 ) , Polish ( Szarota , 1996 ) , Spanish ( Benet-Martinez & Waller , 1997 ) , Turkish ( Somer & Goldberg , 1999 ) , Filipino ( Church , Reyes , Katig- bak , & Grimm , 1997 ) , Korean ( Hahn , Lee , & Ashton , 1999 ) , French ( Boies , Lee , Ashton , Pascal , & Nicol , 2001 ) , Greek ( Saucier et al. , 2005 ) , and Croatian ( Mlačić & Ostendorf , 2005 ) .
Boele De Raad and Dick P. H. Barelds , Department of Psychology , University of Groningen , Groningen , the Netherlands .
We are grateful to Wim Hofstee , Dean Peabody , and Lisa Di Blas for their useful comments on an earlier version of this article .
We thank Henk Kiers and Jos Ten Berge for their psychometric help .
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Boele De Raad or Dick Barelds , Department of Psychology , University of Gro- ningen , Grote Kruisstraat 2/1 , 9712 TS Groningen , the Netherlands .
E-mail : b.de.raad @ rug.nl or d.p.h.barelds @ rug.nl Journal of Personality and Social Psychology Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 2008 , Vol .
94 , No .
2 , 347–364 0022-3514/08/ $ 12.00 DOI : 10.1037/0022-3514.94.2.347 347 Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
Particularly strong points of the psycholexical approach are the use of ordinary language descriptors and the coverage of the full personality trait lexicon .
The importance of the use of ordinary language is expressed in the assumption that the distinctions peo- ple have found worth drawing are embodied in our common stock of words ( Austin , 1970 ) .
This assumption has been put forward as the “ lexical hypothesis , ” which holds that “ all significant individ- ual differences are embodied in language ” ( De Raad , 2000 ; cf .
Allport & Odbert , 1936 ; Cattell , 1943 ; Goldberg , 1981 ) .
This perspective formed the guiding rationale for the psycholexical studies that have led to confirm the Big Five model .
The exploi- tation of ordinary language for scientific use should be done with great care because such a language may be imprecise , ambiguous , and sometimes inaccurate , but it is a storehouse of accumulated wisdom that we can hardly afford to ignore , and it would form a great starting point for cataloguing the perceptual variations in individual differences ( cf .
Wiggins , 1973 ) .
The second strong point , the coverage of the personality trait lexicon , is achieved through selecting all trait-relevant expressions from a tangible lexicon , a dictionary .
This is usually done by selecting trait-descriptive adjectives , under the assumption that adjectives are the typical carriers of trait meaning .
On this point we believe that the psycholexical approach has not made use of its full potential ; moreover , we argue that almost all psycholexical studies have systematically disregarded relevant carriers of trait meaning .
As a consequence , the Big Five dimensions of personality may form a biased and incomplete summary of trait-descriptive mean- ing ( cf .
De Raad & Hofstee , 1993 ) .
The main purpose of this study was not only to demonstrate that the Big Five dimensions are insufficient to fully describe the personality trait lexicon but also to provide evidence of lexically based trait dimensions beyond the Big Five .
As a consequence , Big Five labels may be in need of modification , and Big Five dimen- sions may have to be differently weighted .
Lexical Units of Personality Description The psycholexical approach heavily used dictionaries as the tangible sediments of the lexicon of traits , but a dictionary is not the exclusive way to arrive at a useful vocabulary of personality traits .
Although there are other ways ( e.g. , free descriptions ) to arrive at a full trait vocabulary ( cf .
Kohnstamm , Halverson , Mer- vielde , & Havill , 1998 ) , the advantage of using a dictionary is that it has been under systematic surveillance by generations of lexi- cographers .
A disadvantage is that dictionary entries do not pro- vide information about how to use a word in a certain context ; dictionaries are relatively poor with respect to shading , context , and specificity ( cf .
Briggs , 1992 ) .
All significant word categories—adjectives , nouns , verbs , ad- verbs—have caught the attention of early personality investigators at some point , but the adjectival form was preferred throughout .
Allport and Odbert ( 1936 ) had an open eye for different grammat- ical categories to be part and parcel of personality language , the condition for inclusion being that the terms should add meaning and not simply be different in form .
The logical lingual class for trait description is indeed the class of adjectives because adjectives describe relatively stable attributes of objects , people , and events .
However , psychological , not linguistic , considerations should de- termine the choice of wording .
The lexical hypothesis does not preclude other word categories .
In linguistic terms , one could say that to the extent that words or expressions function in an “ adjec- tival ” way ( De Raad , 1994 ; De Raad & Ostendorf , 1996 ; cf .
Saucier & Goldberg , 1996 ) , they could be accepted for trait- descriptive purposes .
If , for example , a person frequently engages in a certain activity , then a verb describing that activity obtains adjectival meaning .
Verbs and nouns have been separately studied for their person- ality descriptive potential ( De Raad & Hoskens , 1990 ; De Raad , Mulder , Kloosterman , & Hofstee , 1988 ; Di Blas , 2005 ; Goldberg , 1982 ; Henss , 1998 ) .
De Raad ( 1992 ) and De Raad and Hofstee ( 1993 ) , for example , compared the relative contributions of trait adjectives , verbs , and nouns with the contents and dimensionality of the trait structure .
With the adjectives-based Dutch Big Five structure as a basis for comparison , and using the same criteria for factor extraction , for trait verbs a two-dimensional solution seemed appropriate ( De Raad & Hofstee , 1993 ) .
A first factor combined facets of Agreeableness and Conscientiousness ( e.g. , care for , cooperate , agree , support , fulfill ) , and a second combined facets of Emotional Stability and Extraversion ( e.g. , decide , lead , order , take action ) .
For trait nouns , a four-dimensional solution seemed appropriate with factors labeled as Extraversion ( e.g. , comedian , entertainer , partygoer ) , Conscientiousness ( e.g. , organizer , regu- lator , careerist ) , Agreeableness ( e.g. , humanist , kind soul , recon- ciler ) , and Intellect-Openness ( e.g. , philosopher , nonconformist , nihilist ) .
De Raad ( 1992 ) sought to replicate the Big Five factors in the verb and the noun domain , and certain factors did replicate , whereas others did not .
De Raad and Hofstee ( 1993 ) combined adjectives and verbs to obtain self-ratings .
Using the so-called Abridged Big Five Circumplex ( AB5C ) structure based on ratings on adjectives ( De Raad , Hendriks , & Hofstee , 1992 ) as a reference frame , the trait verbs turned out to fill certain segments of the AB5C system that were not filled or not well filled with trait adjectives .
De Raad and Hofstee ( 1993 ) concluded that the lexical tradition produced a trait structure that seems to be word-class dependent .
In a more recent study on English trait nouns , Saucier ( 2003 ) confirmed this conclusion : “ Personality taxonomies based on adjectives are unlikely to be comprehensive , because type- nouns have different content emphases ” ( p. 695 ) .
Because of their different functions , trait adjectives , verbs , and nouns may differentially accommodate psychological characteris- tics .
According to Bolinger ( 1980 ) , verbs are least hospitable to bias because of the relative transitory nature of what they name .
“ A thing , designated by a noun , and a quality , designated by an adjective , are stable enough to build up associations of approval or disapproval ; a process is not ” ( Bolinger , 1980 , p. 80 ) .
Another point of comparison seems to be in the permanency of designation of human characteristics .
According to Bolinger ( 1980 ) , the noun objectifies in a way the adjective can not .
The use of the noun gives the impression one conveys a more definite character .
“ If we are disappointed at Jane ’ s lack of appreciation , we call her ungrateful , or solidify it a step further and call her an ungrateful person .
But if we call her an ingrate we put the brand on her ” ( Bolinger , 1980 , p. 79 ) .
Similar points were made by Wierzbicka ( 1986 ) , who argued that the more permanent characteristics tend to be desig- nated by nouns rather than by adjectives and also that the more extreme or resentful characteristics tend to be communicated by nouns rather than by adjectives .
348 DE RAAD AND BARELDS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
Besides the linguistic comments on the comprehensiveness of the trait-adjective domain , constructive psychological-empirical comments were given by Almagor et al .
( 1995 ) and Benet- Martinez and Waller ( 1997 ) .
They suggested that the Big Five “ do not fully capture the ‘ natural ’ language personality domain ” ( Al- magor et al. , 1995 , p. 300 ) , referring to the exclusion of evaluative terms and state terms .
This would have the effect that evaluative terms associated with esteem are precluded and that state terms used for trait description are barred .
Those conclusions do not hold for the Dutch trait-lexical studies .
Brokken ( 1978 ) constructed a taxonomy with 1,203 Dutch trait adjectives , including sadistic , cruel , mean , bad , treacherous , and many more , all at the very low end of an evaluation index , as opposed to honest , just , reliable , good , sympathetic , and versatile .
Moreover , state terms that could be used as trait terms ( e.g. , happy , relaxed ) were included as well .
Those various terms codetermine the Dutch Big Five system ( De Raad et al. , 1992 ) .
Our present goal to cover the full trait lexicon sympathizes with Almagor et al. ’ s ( 1995 ) “ unrestricted ” approach .
Surely , lexical trait terms that can only be used for evaluative purposes should not be allowed to become part of a descriptive vocabulary , but such terms hardly exist .
In general , we would not follow a separate line of reasoning for terms at the low and high ends of the evaluative continuum .
Lexically Based Universal Factors and Beyond There is now good empirical and psychometric reason to accept the first three factors of the Big Five—Extraversion , Agreeable- ness , and Conscientiousness—as personality trait factors with an international , global status : the Big Three ( De Raad & Peabody , 2005 ; De Raad , Perugini , Hrebı́cková , & Szarota , 1998 ; De Raad , Perugini , & Szirmák , 1997 ; Di Blas & Forzi , 1998 ; Saucier , 1997 ) .
Emotional Stability has not appeared in a coherent form ; it lacks widespread support from the psycholexical approach ( cf .
De Raad & Peabody , 2005 ) .
Also , quantitative indices of similarity across languages and cultures are relatively low for Emotional Stability ( cf .
De Raad et al. , 1998 ) .
The fifth factor of the Big Five , Intellect , has formed an issue from the onset of the psycholexical approach ( cf .
De Raad & Van Heck , 1994 ) .
Assuming the general acceptance of the lexical Big Five , Sauc- ier and Goldberg ( 1998 ) asked what is beyond them and studied the potential of peripheral trait descriptors , or “ outlier ” descriptors , which are often excluded from lexical studies .
They found that relatively substantial numbers of trait adjectives represented Neg- ative Valence and Religiousness .
Ashton et al .
( 2004 ) identified the sixth factor , Honesty-Humility , in various lexical studies , em- phasizing trustworthiness , modesty , lack of greed , and lack of slyness .
This factor might also be referred to as Morality , Sincer- ity , or Integrity ( cf .
Szirmák & De Raad , 1994 ) .
Suggestions for more than five factors can arguably be made from two perspectives .
One is to be less restrictive with respect to the selection of trait terms , which will possibly lead to the inclu- sion of more evaluative low base rate terms .
This may result in a factor of the Negative Valence type .
The other is to simply extract more factors ( cf .
Saucier & Goldberg , 1998 ) , and this may regu- larly result in a new factor as indicated by such labels as Integrity or Honesty .
We expect that the use of a full and unrestricted vocabulary of personality descriptors will result in ( versions of ) the Big Five factors .
In addition , we would expect Negative Valence , Positive Valence , and Honesty-Humility as clusters of trait meaning with some weight , but , because of the differences in the selection of descriptors for the present studies , it is not clear whether such clusters would emerge as separate factors in an exploratory factor analysis .
Three studies are described in the present article .
Study 1 covers the selection of a new set of trait-relevant terms and the main reduction process .
Study 2 describes ratings of usefulness and a further reduction .
Study 3 provides a description of the new trait structure in the Dutch language .
Study 1 : Selection of Personality-Relevant Terms The purpose of Study 1 was to arrive at a nearly exhaustive list of personality-relevant terms , one that is unrestricted both regard- ing word classes and regarding evaluative terms with a relatively low base rate .
Included in this purpose was a drastic reduction of such a list to relatively manageable proportions .
The procedure to select relevant terms differed in three respects from previous psycholexical studies .
The first of these was not to have any restrictions in advance regarding certain classes of words .
The second was the use of a “ conservative ” procedure in selecting words from the lexicon .
In order to reduce the chances of errone- ously eliminating personality-relevant words during the more dras- tic reduction stages , we removed words that were not trait relevant rather than selected terms that were trait relevant .
The third was the formulation of brief sentences during the last stages of the selec- tion procedure , in which each selected trait-relevant word formed the kernel meaning of the sentence .
We started with an initial set of words taken from a computer- ized database of the Dutch language , made available by Celex , the Center for Lexical Research in Nijmegen , the Netherlands .
That set consisted of 130,778 words .
The Celex database was primarily built on Van Dale ’ s Comprehensive Dictionary of Contemporary Dutch ( Van Sterkenburg & Pijnenburg , 1984 ) , supplemented with words from the Word List of the Dutch Language ( 1954 ) and from the corpus of the most frequent words of the Institute for Dutch Lexicology .
The set of 130,778 words contained different spelling versions of certain words , such as corrupt and korrupt .
A selection was made of a single spelling , resulting in a list of 124,139 words .
In this list , sometimes words appeared more than once because of the different readings of the word ( e.g. , the Dutch word bende refers to a group of people as well as to a disorderly situation ) .
The list is represented in the first three columns of Table 1 in the form of a distribution over the word classes , with each word class provided with an example .
In order to obtain a nearly exhaustive list of trait descriptors , two team members began by following the “ conservative ” procedure in selecting terms from the set of 124,139 words .
This conservative procedure was applied during the first four of the five distinct stages of reduction .
In addition to this procedural principle , several more specific principles were applied in decreasing degree during the five stages that each had a specific emphasis of attention .
The numbers of personality-relevant terms that were retained after applying both the main principle and the more specific principles are given in the fourth column of Table 1 , totaling a list of 4,595 349A NEW TAXONOMY OF DUTCH PERSONALITY TRAITS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
terms .
During the first three stages , those principles were applied without discussion ; during the last two stages , arguments had to be provided .
In summary terms , the more specific principles involved the removal of ( a ) terms that are not related to persons or behaviors in any way ; ( b ) obvious nonfamiliar , obsolete , and slang terms ; ( c ) artificial constructions , difficult words , and unusually stylish words ; ( d ) role- and job-related terms that are obviously without trait connotation ; ( e ) feminine versions of words if there is no difference with masculine versions ; ( f ) redundancies due to reap- pearance of root words in different word classes ; ( g ) words that only relate to groups ; and ( h ) words related to ideologies , but only if a trait version can be retained .
During the first stage , special focus was on the removal of a large number of nouns that had no reference to persons or behav- iors .
If the two team members agreed about a word as being not useful for the description of persons or behaviors , then it was deleted .
This step resulted in an approximately 50 % reduction , with a remainder of 62,674 words .
The large majority of the removed words were nouns .
The second stage also yielded a reduction of about 50 % , to a list of 32,894 words .
The emphasis at this point was on the removal of words that referred to things or circumstances outside the person and that have no reference to personality or behavior .
In addition , feminine versions of nouns ( e.g. , paintress ) were removed if there was no real difference with masculine versions ( painter ) ; words referring to ideologies were removed ( e.g. , capitalism ) , but only if a person-relevant version ( e.g. , capitalist ) was available to retain ; words only used for groups ( e.g. , police ) were removed , and words referring to jobs and functions were removed , but only if they had no trait denotation .
For example , electrician was removed , and commander was retained .
Also during this stage , removal only took place if the two team members agreed .
Also , for words with more than one reading , those readings that had no reference to personality or behavior , were removed .
The different readings , which are numbered in the dictionary , were always checked in the dictionary for their distinctive characteristics ( Van Sterkenburg & Pijnenburg , 1984 ) .
During the third stage , some additional criteria , not all directly evident from the earlier eight , that were specified in the process during the first two stages were applied .
Words were removed if the team members agreed that words only referred to family or friendship ( e.g. , in-law , adoptive , living alone ) ; to physical char- acteristics without a trait denotation ( e.g. , ashy , monkey face ) ; to professions or titles ( e.g. , archducal , shareholder ) ; to medical , health , or “ scientific ” conditions ( e.g. , asthmatic , abort , astrophys- ical ) ; or to politics and religion ( e.g. , of another persuasion , ayatollah ) .
This stage produced a further reduction by 7,400 terms to 25,494 terms .
Starting at Stage 4 , removal criteria had to be provided with explicit arguments , especially in cases of disagreement during earlier stages .
At this stage , a drastic reduction took place from 25,494 single terms to 9,770 personality-relevant sentences .
The list of 25,494 consisted of terms that presumably had a reference to persons or behaviors .
Each single term was examined for its possibility to be used to distinguish the personality of one person from that of others in terms of the relevant trait .
For verbs , an implicit criterion was frequency .
“ To argue ” could be personality relevant , for example , if a person could be said to generally argue more ( or less ) than others .
Certain terms , especially verbs , appeared more than once in the list because the dictionary gave different readings , numbered as such in the dictionary .
All listed terms and readings of terms still available for this fourth stage were used to formulate sentences , the shortest ones possible with the personality-relevant term as its kernel meaning .
Anticipating instructions to participants in which self-raters had to assume each sentence to start with “ I am ” and other-raters had to assume each sentence to start with “ He is ” or “ She is , ” only the complementary part was formulated to form the sentence .
Adjectives usually would fit the complementary part “ .
.
.
.
an [ adjective ] person ” or “ .
.
.
.
an [ adjective ] someone..
Attribute nouns ( e.g. , self-respect ) would fit the complementary part “ .
.
.
.
someone with [ attribute noun ] , ” and type nouns ( e.g. , swindler ) would fit “ .
.
.
.
a [ type noun ] . ” Adverbs would fit “ .
.
.
.
someone who behaves [ adverb ] . ” In cases of more than one read- Table 1 Distribution of 124,139 Words , Examples , and the Selections Used Word classes Frequency Example ( Dutch ) Personality-relevant terms retained Final selection Selections used Nouns 95,660 bank ( bank ) 884 419 187a Adjectives 13,912 large ( groot ) 1,724 1,015 1,001b Verbs 11,837 belated ( verlaat ) 1,511 684 981c Adverbs 1,528 subtly ( fijntjes ) 379 164 162d Articles 8 the ( het ) 0 0 0 Conjunctions 85 but ( maar ) 0 0 0 Expressions 173 “ forth ” ( te voorschijn ) 92 46 0 Interjections 406 “ oh dear ” ( asjemenou ) 0 0 0 Numerals 281 more/six ( meer/zes ) 3 1 0 Prepositions 116 about ( over ) 0 0 0 Pronouns 133 me ( ik ) 2 2 0 Total 124,139 4,595 2,331 2,331 a Ninety-four percent originated from the nouns in the final selection .
b Ninety-six percent originated from the adjectives in the final selection .
c Sixty- nine percent originated from the verbs and 23 % from the nouns in the final selection .
d Eighty-one percent originated from the adverbs in the final selection .
350 DE RAAD AND BARELDS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
ing of a word , different sentences were formulated , fitting the different readings .
For example , the Dutch noun aanbidder has two meanings , namely ( a ) “ someone who adores ” and ( b ) “ some- one who courts a person. ” In this particular case , the second meaning was deleted because that meaning also appeared as ie- mand het hof maken , which translates into “ courting a person. ” Because of the fact that , especially for verbs , no consensus has been built up in the psycholexical history about how to select and prepare verbs for trait-descriptive purposes , we summarize the rules we followed .
As with adjectives , nouns , and adverbs , the main “ theoretical ” criterion for verbs to be selected was their “ adjectival ” potency , that is , whether they can be used to describe how individuals differ in how frequently or how easily they engage in the action or process represented by the verb .
In order to facilitate the evaluation of this potency , we used two mold sen- tences corresponding to the general “ grammatical ” format subject- verb-object into which verbs or readings of verbs would have to fit .
These mold sentences were “ is someone who [ verb ] ” or “ is some- one who [ verb ] [ filler ] , ” with the “ filler , ” representing the different readings provided in the dictionary , necessary to complete the ( trait ) meaning of the verb .
The “ is someone who ” part of these mold sentences was expected to induce part of the adjectival character of the verb .
Examples given in the dictionary in italics , illustrating the meaning of a word or a reading of a word , were not selected for personality descriptive purposes .
For about 25 % of the verbs in the final selection ( see Table 1 , Column 5 ) , the first mold sentence ( without fillers ) was used .
Virtually all these verb sentences were provided with a modifier ( e.g. , easily , often , likes to ) to emphasize the adjectival usage .
Examples are “ is someone who often phantasizes ” ; “ is someone who likes to discuss ” ; and “ is someone who gives up easily. ” For about 36 % of the verbs in the final selection ( see Table 1 , Column 5 ) , neutral fillers were used .
The most frequent filler given in the dictionary was “ s.o. ” ( someone ) ; as a rule , this was turned into the plural “ people ” or “ others ” to generalize it to an adjectival usage .
Examples are “ is someone who hurts people ” and “ is someone who belittles others. ” Other neutral fillers we frequently applied were things and something , as in “ is someone who gets things done. ” In just a few cases , modifiers were added where it seemed appropriate ( e.g. , “ is someone who likes to stir up things ” and “ is someone who likes to explain things ” ) .
A filler used with about 10 % of the verbs was “ o.s. , ” indicating reflexive verbs , in which subject and object coincide .
Examples are “ is someone who denies him/herself ” and “ is someone who prostitutes him/herself. ” The remainder of the fillers , about 27 % , generally concerned verb-specific fillers , usually forming the complementary part to the verb in a standard expression , specifying the distinct reading of the verb .
To illustrate how the above rules apply to verbs with specific fillers , we give two explicit examples , namely for the Dutch mijden ( avoid ) and the Dutch aandikken ( exaggerate ) .
The dictionary gives the following five readings of the Dutch verb mijden : 1 .
( van plaatsen ) er niet komen [ English : ( of places ) not coming there ] .
Retained as mijden van plaatsen ( to avoid places ) .
2. zijn best doen om ergens niet te komen [ English : to do his best not to come somewhere ] .
Retained as mijden van plaatsen ( to avoid places ) .
3. aan iets ( trachten te ) ontkomen [ English : to ( try to ) escape from some- thing ] .
Retained as aan iets trachten te ontkomen ( to try to escape from something ) .
4. ontwijken of trachten te ontwijken ( persoon of gezelschap ) [ English : to avoid or to try to avoid ( person or company ) ] .
Retained as mijden van gezelschap ( avoid company ) .
5 .
( niet alge- meen ) ontzien [ English : ( not generally ) to spare ( as in to spare the use of your arm ) ] .
We did not retain nongeneral Reading 5 , where indicated as such in the dictionary , leaving four items for the verb mijden .
Of these , Readings 1 and 2 were retained in a single expression because they were both about avoiding places .
Reading 3 was deleted during the process of reduction because we also had the verb ontvluchten , which translates into “ escaping from. ” The two remaining items , ( avoid places and avoid company ) , were listed together with similar expressions , such as “ avoiding things ” ( trans- lation of vermijden ) , “ running away from things ” ( translation of weglopen van ) , and “ avoiding difficulties ” ( translation of uit de weg gaan van moeilijkheden ) .
In the process of further reduction and removing of redundancies , considering also these last expres- sions , “ avoiding company ” was retained as the only reading of the Dutch mijden .
Another example is the verb aandikken .
The dictionary gives three readings : 1. dikker maken [ English : making thicker ( as in making lines thicker ) ] .
2. een verhaal aankleden , overdrijven [ English : dressing up a story , exaggerate ] .
3. dikker worden [ En- glish : growing thicker ] .
Readings 1 and 3 were skipped because they were not consid- ered relevant for personality description .
Reading 2 was retained as “ iemand die verhalen aandikt , ” which is the “ natural ” form for exaggerating in a story .
Exaggerate was used for a separate item as a translation of the Dutch verb overdrijven .
Expressions , of which there were 46 in the final selection ( see Table 1 ) , were restricted to the most current and familiar ones of those mentioned in the dictionary .
Expressions were usually given in the dictionary as readings of a noun or a verb in the expression .
Those nouns and verbs formed the dictionary entries ; the expres- sions were often coded under those word categories .
For example , the expression “ de spits afbijten ” [ go first ] is given as a reading both to the noun spits and to the verb bijten .
The dictionary entries spits and bijten were not considered trait-relevant words them- selves , but in the expression “ de spits afbijten , ” given in the dictionary , those words obtained a trait-relevant meaning , fitting the ( translated ) sentence “ is someone who likes to go first. ” Other examples are “ is someone who likes to throw a party ” and “ is someone with an open eye for things. ” Party and eye were the dictionary entries , and the readings to those words given in the dictionary , “ throw a party ” and “ having an open eye for , ” were selected because they had trait-relevant meaning .
Expressions only made it to the list if there were no clear alternatives in the adjectives , nouns , or verbs .
Quite a few terms did not make sense in a personality-relevant sentence so that the sentence formulation itself was a way to reduce the list of terms .
In the process of formulating sentences , the application of more specific criteria led to the removal , after discussion , of thousands of terms over which there was no agree- ment during the first three stages .
In addition , difficult , unusual , vague , technical , and rather extreme terms ( e.g. , rapist ) were removed , if the team members agreed .
Also , words that applied only to males or to females and those applicable only to a certain age group were removed .
351A NEW TAXONOMY OF DUTCH PERSONALITY TRAITS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
During Stage 5 , the emphasis was on reducing on the basis of redundancy , in the form of repetition of word roots in different word classes .
As a rule , we gave priority to sentences with adjec- tives .
In addition , sentences were removed that were too artificial , obsolete , difficult , stylish , specific , or mainly slang .
The set of sentences resulting from this stage totaled 4,595 , which included all 1,203 adjectives used by Brokken ( 1978 ) .
As a result of putting words into sentences , terms originating from certain word classes could shift to other word classes .
For example , the adjective decisive became an adverb in the sentence “ .
.
.
.
someone who acts decisively. ” To give an impression of the amount of shift , we refer to the last two columns of Table 1 , anticipating the results of further reductions taking place in Study 2 and Study 3 .
In the Final selection column , all items were still coded according to their word class of origin .
Of the 1,015 adjec- tives in this column for example , 966 were used in adjective-based sentences .
The remaining 35 ( totaling 1,001 ; see last column of Table 1 ) stemmed from other “ final selection ” categories , mainly from adverbs and nouns .
The largest shift took place from the nouns and expressions in the Final selection column to the verb category in the last column ( see Table 1 ) .
Respectively , 230 nouns and 44 expressions moved to the verb category in that column .
The explanation is that quite a few nouns only made personality de- scriptive sense in an item of the verb sentence format ( e.g. , to throw a party ) .
The procedure we followed to arrive at a full catalogue of trait descriptors is relatively novel .
Especially because of the selection of personality verbs and expressions , the procedure became rela- tively complex .
The procedure was applied in a single language ( Dutch ) , and the application of the procedure in a new language , involving the selection of various types of trait words , increasing differentiation of selection rules , converting of the personality words into sentences , may result in more differences in results than what used to be the case with trait adjectives only .
The described set of rules may need adaptation to account for the specifics of the language of application .
Study 2 : Ratings of Clarity , Personality Relevance , and Further Reduction The list of 4,595 sentences was subjected to judgments of usefulness .
This was done in three phases .
In the first phase , 14 judges , all with higher education , 4 of which were students of psychology , rated the sentences on a 3-point scale , ranging from 1 ( the sentence does not tell much about how the person is ) to 2 ( tells something about how the person is ) to 3 ( tells a lot about how the person is ) .
In addition , the judges could use a score of zero in cases in which they were not sure about the meaning of the sentence .
The interrater reliability ( coefficient alpha ) was 0.78 , based on the scores 1–3 .
Sentences that were judged unclear ( score 0 ) by three judges or more were deleted , yielding a reduction by 324 sentences .
The cut-off point for the relevance rating ( scores 1–3 ) was , rather arbitrarily , set at 1.86 , which was just below the midpoint of the scale .
Sentences with a higher rating , near the midpoint and above , were , after some deliberation , judged to be relevant .
The applica- tion of this relevance criterion resulted in a reduction by 1,249 words , yielding a working set of 3,022 sentences .
In the second phase , the list of 3,022 was further reduced during the first sessions in which self- and other-ratings ( see Study 3 ) were collected .
The first 64 participants , all psychology students , provided additional familiarity ratings .
If about 10 % of the sub- jects had marked a sentence as unfamiliar , it was removed .
This led to a reduction by 533 sentences , of which the majority were difficult words ( often of Latin or Greek origin ) and metaphorical expressions ( e.g. , kent het klappen van de zweep [ “ knows the ropes ” ] ) .
This second phase left 2,489 sentences for further use .
In a third phase , the next 116 subjects who provided self- and other-ratings on the list of 2,489 sentences were again asked to mark the sentences on familiarity .
Also here the “ 10 % unfamiliar ” rule was applied , yielding a reduction by 124 sentences .
The final list comprised 2,365 sentences , which included 834 ( of the possi- ble 1,203 ) sentences with trait adjectives that have been used in previous Dutch trait studies .
Study 3 : Factoring Trait-Descriptive Sentences Method Participants , Materials , and Procedure The list of 2,365 trait-descriptive sentences was administered for self- and other-ratings to another 1,286 subjects so that the total number of participants became 1,466 .
Of these , 391 were first-year students ( 307 women ) who obtained credits for their participation ; they had to provide self-ratings .
The mean age of the student participants was 20.5 years ( SD 5.7 ) .
The students were re- quested to find between two and four others with whom they were well acquainted , such as family members , friends , and neighbors .
This group , consisting of 1,075 participants ( 641 women ) , had to provide ratings of the students .
The mean age of this group of raters was 34.8 years ( SD 16.5 ) .
Of the total group , the mean age was 31 years ( SD 15.7 ) .
Sixty-five percent of the participants were women .
The 391 student participants were given a questionnaire for self-ratings and two to four questionnaires to be filled out by their acquaintances .
The questionnaires could be filled out at home .
As a condition to obtain credits for participation , the student partici- pants had to take care that all questionnaires were returned in time .
The questionnaires were provided with an instruction to rate the target person ( self or other ) on each item in terms of a 4-point scale , ranging from 1 ( not applicable to the target person ) to 2 ( more not applicable than applicable ) to 3 ( more applicable than not applicable ) to 4 ( applicable ) .
The other-raters were requested to give details about their educational level and about their rela- tionship with the target .
Participants were suggested to take two or three breaks when filling out the questionnaire .
The participants reported to need about 3.5 hr on average , breaks excluded .
Analyses The factoring consisted of principal components analyses ( PCAs ) on the complete original and the ipsatized data set and on a subset of adjective-based sentences .
The factoring of the subset of adjectives-based sentences was done in order to find out whether the previous ( Dutch ) Big Five and six-factor structures ( Ashton et al. , 2004 ; De Raad et al. , 1992 ) , based on a subset of 551 of the 1,203 trait adjectives used by Brokken ( 1978 ) , could be 352 DE RAAD AND BARELDS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
reliably identified in the present data set .
The ipsatizing of the complete set ( subtracting mean scores ) was applied in order to arrive at a structure with greater clarity .
Hofstee , Ten Berge , and Hendriks ( 1998 ) have described different ways to perform such a correction legitimately ( cf .
Ten Berge , 1999 ) .
The technique that was applied here was based on the average of responses to a subset of pairs of opposites , expressed as deviation from the midpoint of the scale .
The correction consisted of subtracting this score from the responses of a rater .
Because of the proportionally much larger number of other ratings and the possibility of an effect thereof , we factored self-ratings and partner ratings separately and compared them preceding the final conclusions about the structure .
Before applying the PCAs , we wanted to have the opportunity to screen the functionality of the 2,365 variables by checking their means and standard deviations .
It turned out that there were still some items that hardly differentiated between participants .
We decided to remove items that had a standard deviation smaller than 0.35 .
In itself , this was a rather arbitrary decision , yet items below that criterion were almost without exception extremely negative , and absolute and definitive in wording ( in Dutch ) , so that hardly anyone would consider applying such expressions to self or to others .
Moreover , for almost all the items deleted , close equiva- lents were available with almost similar negative meaning just above the criterion of 0.35 .
Examples of removed items are beats up people , a tyrant , a vicious person , a nitwit , and a murderous person .
Examples of low-endorsement items still in the reduced set are a vandalistic person , a malicious person , a cruel person , and a treacherous person .
Thus , 34 items were deleted , leaving 2,331 for applying the PCAs ( see fifth column of Table 1 ) .
The factor results for this reduced set of variables did not really differ from those for the full set , except for a shift in meaning for the ninth factor in the nine-factor solution .
In the complete set , the ninth factor was a Pathology/Violence factor , whereas in the reduced set , Factor 9 became a Fearlessness factor .
The reduced set of items included 821 trait adjectives ( some of which are now in adverbial form ) , available from previous studies ( Brokken , 1978 ; De Raad et al. , 1992 ) .
The total set of items with terms actually functioning as typical adjectives was 953 .
Results Replication of the Previous Five- and Six-Factor Structures The structures of the previously published Dutch Big Five and six-factor structures were based on ratings of a subset of 551 trait adjectives from a larger set of 1,203 adjectives ( Brokken , 1978 ; De Raad et al. , 1992 ) .
Due to the reduction of the 1,203 set to 821 trait adjectives in the present data set , 441 out of 551 adjectives ( now included in a brief sentence ) were available to compare the present findings with the previous structures .
First , the ratings of 600 participants ( 400 self- and 200 other- ratings ) on the 441 trait adjectives from the previous study were factor analyzed ( old structure ) using PCA .
Second , the ratings of the 1,466 participants ( 391 self- and 1,075 other-ratings ) on the sentences containing the same 441 trait adjectives from the present data set were factor analyzed ( new structure ) using PCA .
Because the previous analyses were performed on ipsatized data , that is , standardization per person , now the data were first similarly ipsa- tized .
In both cases , five and six factors were varimax rotated .
Five factors .
The old five-factor structure turned out to be an almost perfect reproduction of the previously published Dutch Big Five structure , in which Agreeableness , Emotional Stability , Ex- traversion , and Conscientiousness appeared according to estab- lished understandings .
The fifth Dutch factor , Intellect with the “ rebellious and progressive ” connotation , was also clearly recov- ered , expressed in high-loading items such as critical , progressive , versatile , creative , original , and rebellious , versus uncritical , obe- dient , conservative , superficial , small-minded , and prudish .
The reduction of the trait variable set of 551 to 441 seemed to have no apparent effect on the structure .
Also in the new five-factor structure , the first four factors appeared to deserve the established nomenclature .
The fifth factor now combined creativity and rebelliousness with sensitivity and enthusiasm on the one pole and small-mindedness and conserva- tism with lack of sensitivity and ruthlessness on the other pole .
For purposes of interpretation , we constructed marker scales for the Big Five factors on the basis of the 551 trait adjectives , using the highest loading adjectives .
We identified 30 markers for each of the Big Five factors that were also available in the trait list constituting the structure based on the 441 trait adjectives .
In Table 2 , the alpha coefficients for the Big Five marker scales are given , together with the correlations between the marker scales and the newly constructed five factors .
The moderate correlation for In- tellect corresponds to the shift in meaning observed above .
Six factors .
The old six-factor structure was essentially the same as the old Big Five structure plus an additional Honesty- Humility factor , with its typical markers sincere , honest , loyal , and reliable versus swaggering , boasting , and conceited ( cf .
Ashton et al. , 2004 ) .
The new six-factor structure showed the same shift in meaning for the fifth factor as observed for the new five-factor structure .
The sixth factor had typical Honesty-Humility markers ( e.g. , upright , just , and sincere vs. haughty , greedy , and boasting ) , but it also had traits typical of other factors .
Also for the interpretation of the new six-factor structure , we constructed marker scales .
In this case , we could identify 25 markers for each of the six factors on the basis of the highest loading trait adjectives .
Moreover , we identified 30 markers of Honesty-Humility in our full item set ( see the Appendix ) , using Ashton et al. ’ s ( 2004 ) Table 5 as a resource .
The coefficient alphas for each of the marker scales are given in Table 3 , together with their correlations with the new six factors .
Table 2 Correlations Between Big Five Marker Scales and Big Five Factors Based on New Ratings ( N 1,446 ) on 441 Trait Adjectives Big Five marker scalesa Dutch Big Five factors 1 2 3 4 5 1 .
Extraversion .91 .75 .03 .08 .41 .24 2 .
Agreeableness .90 .15 .78 .11 .17 .18 3 .
Conscientiousness .91 .06 .28 .87 .11 .01 4 .
Emotional Stability .89 .03 .12 .21 .87 .19 5 .
Intellect .75 .01 .29 .11 .34 .61 Note .
Correlations .40 are in boldface .
a All marker scales are based on 30 items .
353A NEW TAXONOMY OF DUTCH PERSONALITY TRAITS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
The two marker scales of Honesty-Humility showed similar cor- relations with the six factors , the highest ones with the Honesty- Humility factor and additional substantial ones with the Agree- ableness factor .
Regarding Factor 6 , there is a clear shift in meaning away from the Honesty-Humility interpretation .
Congruencies Between Old and New Factor Structures For a more definitive answer to whether the old and new structures may be considered identical , we calculated congruence coefficients between the corresponding factors .
In order to opti- mize the opportunity for corresponding factors to be identified as equivalents , the configurations of the two new sets of factors were orthogonally rotated with the old structures as targets ( Kiers & Groenen , 1996 ) .
For the five-factor structure , the congruence co- efficients after rotation were 0.89 , 0.94 , 0.84 , 0.89 , and 0.81 .
The first four congruencies were quite acceptable indices of correspon- dence of factors ( see Haven & Ten Berge , 1977 ) .
The fifth indi- cated moderate congruence , which corresponds to the differences observed in the contents of the two factors .
With respect to the Big Five model , these findings suggest that the meanings attached to trait terms ( connotations ) have not drastically changed over the period of more than a quarter of a century .
For the six-factor structure , the congruence coefficients after rotation were 0.92 , 0.91 , 0.91 , 0.85 , 0.79 , and 0.69 .
The sixth factor , as defined by the old data set , did not replicate with new participants .
So , although the corresponding factors share Honesty-Humility items , they are not the same .
Number of Factors in the Complete Data Set With respect to the number of factors to extract , we were generally guided by two types of considerations .
One was psycho- metrical , mainly determined by the eigenvalues , the scree test , and by studying the stability of the factors across subsets of the data set ; the other was determined by both the interpretability of factors and expectations of factors that could appear and by factor struc- tures advocated in the research literature .
We started with factoring the original data set ( no ipsatization ) .
The eigenvalue pattern indicated that close to 50 factors would make sense in terms of reliability .
The first 50 eigenvalues were all higher than five , with coefficient alphas all greater than 0.80 for unrotated factors ( cf .
Ten Berge & Hofstee , 1999 ) .
The first 15 eigenvalues were as follows ( rounded off ) : 347 , 128 , 74 , 60 , 45 , 34 , 28 , 21 , 18 , 17 , 15 , 14 , 13 , 12 , and 12 .
The scree test did not give an unequivocal indication about the number of factors to extract , but the number could be from 7 up to 10 .
We decided to extract 1–12 factors in order to have the possi- bility to study the relations between factors of different stages of extraction and to concentrate particularly on the extraction levels with 7–10 factors .
Factors 11 and 12 of the 11- and 12-factor solutions turned out to be uninterpretable , for which reason they were left out of the discussion .
Figure 1 presents an overview of the succession of factor extraction with correlations between the factors from adjacent levels of extraction .
The codes above the factor names refer to the factor numbers at a certain level , for example , 3/1 and 5/3 , respectively , refer to the first factor at the three-factor level and third factor at the five-factor level .
Correla- tions lower than .35 were left out of Figure 1 .
There is some splitting off of content ( partitioning ) for some factors from one level to factors at the next level , pointing at a certain level of hierarchy between factors from different solutions , such as the relationship between Virtue ( 4/1 ) and Harmony ( 5/5 ) and between Harmony ( 7/4 ) and Intellect ( 8/8 ) , correlating .40 and .46 , respectively .
Other interesting partitions are those between Pleasure ( 5/4 ) , on the one hand , Extraversion ( 6/6 ) and Conscien- tiousness ( 6/4 ) , on the other hand .
The differences in labels be- tween related factors at adjacent levels ( e.g. , Harmony , 7/4 and Agreeableness , 8/4 ) should express their hierarchical nature .
Ipsatizing Ipsatization ( standardization of responses per participant ) has been the convention in the various psycholexical studies and has been seriously disputed ( e.g. , Dunlap & Cornwell , 1994 ; Hofstee et al. , 1998 ; Ten Berge , 1999 ) .
Ipsatizing would imply sacrificing ( a large part of ) the first main component , which would be poor practice if that component is indeed psychologically meaningful .
One important reason to ipsatize prior to factoring is to arrive at a factor structure of greater clarity .
We followed a legitimate pro- cedure suggested by Ten Berge ( 1999 ) , which is ipsatizing by subtracting the mean score of an individual from all scores of that individual , based on a balanced set of logical opposites .
This Table 3 Correlations Between Markers of Six Factors and a Six-Factor Structure Based on New Ratings ( N 1,446 ) on 441 Trait Adjectives Six-factor marker scalesa Dutch six-factor structure 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 .
Extraversion .89 .82 .04 .08 .34 .14 .10 2 .
Agreeableness .87 .02 .81 .06 .14 .08 .18 3 .
Conscientiousness .90 .03 .22 .85 .06 .02 .20 4 .
Emotional Stability .90 .05 .10 .21 .87 .20 .10 5 .
Intellect .78 .08 .05 .25 .32 .50 .27 6 .
Honesty-Humility .86 .04 .48 .26 .17 .07 .63 Honesty-Humilityb .89 .07 .42 .35 .25 .17 .57 Note .
Correlations .40 are in boldface .
a Six-factor marker scales are based on 25 items .
b Honesty-Humility ( Ashton et al. , 2004 ) is based on 30 items .
354 DE RAAD AND BARELDS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
Figure 1 .
Emergence of factors in 10 solutions .
355A NEW TAXONOMY OF DUTCH PERSONALITY TRAITS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
procedure might suppress the emergence of an acquiescence fac- tor .
The present questionnaire had a substantial number of logical opposites—136 pairs of opposites could be identified among the 2,331 items , nearly all adjectives such as pleasant–unpleasant , accurate–inaccurate , and reliable–unreliable .
We used the subset with 136 logical pairs of opposites to obtain the mean score for that set of opposite pairs per rater .
This score , presumed to be the acquiescence score , had a reliability of 0.94 .
Acquiescence explained 4.8 % of the variance in the full data set .
For each rater , his or her score was subtracted from all of his or her responses .
The scores corrected for acquiescence were factored , following the same procedure as in the case of original scores .
The structures after the alleged acquiescence correction did not increase clarity .
On the contrary , at the eight- , nine- , and 10-factor levels , the interpretation of certain factors became less clear , and in the nine-factor solution , one factor became completely uninterpret- able .
Moreover , generally , there were more partitions of factors from one level to the other .
The factor structures , with one factor up to seven factors , were essentially the same as those for the original data .
We correlated the corresponding factors at the eight- factor level ( in this case , the correlations are the same as congru- ence coefficients ) after rotating the factors of one set to the factors in the other set as targets , and vice versa ( cf .
Ten Berge , 1986 ) .
The averages of the two sets of correlations ran from .90 to .98 for the first seven pairs of factors , with .75 for the eighth pair of factors .
For these reasons , continuation with ipsatized data did not seem to be warranted .
Ten Factor Solutions Ten factor solutions are subsequently discussed , emphasizing the relations between the factors from one solution to the other and pointing at some partitions .
In all cases , interpretations are based on a large portion of the highest loading variables in the pertinent solution , taking into account the level of the solution and the partitions that take place from level to level as well as the corre- lations between the factors from adjacent levels .
One factor .
In the Greek trait taxonomy , Saucier et al .
( 2005 ) recently referred to the first unrotated factor as “ Evaluation. ” We preferred to emphasize the dispositional meaning of the factor , instead of a judgmental meaning as in Social Desirability or Evaluation .
Therefore we labeled the present first factor Virtue ( see Figure 1 ) , expressed in items such as sensible , honest , friendly , good , decent , keeps promises , balanced , polite , and rea- sonable versus puffed with pride , cantankerous , childish , unjust , unsensible , and unsympathetic .
Two factors .
The present two-factor solution , with Virtue and Dynamism , could , in a broad sense , well represent the historical— and rather general—conceptions of both Character and Tempera- ment ( cf .
Cloninger , Svrakic , & Przybeck , 1993 ; Strelau & Zawadzki , 1996 ) .
Virtue indeed captures the moral features of character ( decent , good , reliable , balanced ) , and Dynamism includes features of the “ formal ” aspects of temperament , exemplified in items such as enthusiasm , spirit , vigor , vividness , energy , and determination ( cf .
Strelau , 1987 ) .
Saucier et al .
( 2005 ) distinguished Morality and Dynamism as two factors capturing traits in the Greek language ; these two factors seem to express similar contents .
Maybe of greater interest is the possible relationship to the two general conceptions Communion and Agency ( Wiggins , 1991 ) or alpha and beta ( Digman , 1997 ) .
Both these two pairs of rather generic concepts carry kernel characteristics of Agreeableness and Extra- version , respectively .
Indeed , Virtue captures many traits that are typical of Agreeableness , and Dynamism carries many of the traits that are typical of Extraversion .
Because our impression was that not only Virtue but also Dynamism conveyed evaluative meaning , more along the lines of Positive Valence , we decided to relate both factors to an index of evaluation .
Such an index was available from Brokken ( 1978 ) , who collected evaluation ratings for 1,203 trait adjectives .
For the subset of 821 trait adjectives included in the present study , the values on these ratings were correlated with the two factors ( load- ings ) Virtue and Dynamism .
The correlations were .90 and .85 , respectively .
So , both these two factors carry strong evaluative meaning .
That observation in itself gives a good reason to use the labels Virtue and Dynamism to emphasize their distinctive fea- tures , instead of using the label Evaluation for the first factor only .
Three factors .
At the three-factor level , Anxiety made its appearance , a factor that forms a preview of the Big Five factor Emotional Stability .
This new factor does not show links of any substance with Virtue and Dynamism at the previous factor level , and it should therefore be considered as a new factor , with many items typical of Emotional Stability such as self-confidence , self- assured , immune to stress , assertive , and stable versus uncertain , worrying , nervous , and sensitive .
Four factors .
The distinctly new factor at the four-factor level is called Pleasure , which should express both its dynamic charac- ter and its impulsive , excitement , and pleasure-seeking aspects , and its latter characteristics represent facets of Extraversion .
Ex- amples of items for Pleasure are Gets the party going , exuberant , cheers people up , likes to have fun , impulsive , and talkative versus closed , reserved , introverted , punctual , thorough , and inhibited .
The factor has clear dynamic features , but the emphasis is now more on productivity and achievement .
Typical prosocial items ( e.g. , someone who encourages people ) , and to some extent typical Conscientiousness items ( e.g. , a punctual person ) , obtained sub- stantial loadings ( positively and negatively , respectively ) on Plea- sure .
Because of these shifts in meaning , we renamed Factor 2 at this level Competence .
Five factors .
The new factor that appeared at the five-factor level , Harmony , apparently draws some of its meaning from two distinct factors at the previous level , Virtue and Anxiety .
Har- mony , to be considered as a more comprising precursor of Agree- ableness , relates to the flexible and peaceful characteristics of Virtue and to the sensitivity and compliance of Anxiety .
Some typical items of Harmony are patient , mild , flexible , and kind versus bossy , dominant , easily irritated , and seeks confrontation .
The other four factors have essentially the same core as the four at the previous level .
At this five-factor level , Anxiety was renamed Emotional Stability because here , it appeared as the somewhat narrower , but rather typical Big Five factor .
Six factors .
Two additional Big Five factors , Extraversion and Conscientiousness , emerged at the six-factor level .
Conscientious- ness relates negatively to Pleasure due to the impulsive and un- productive features that are part of Pleasure and indeed also contribute to the meaning of ( particularly the negative pole of ) Conscientiousness .
Pleasure lost some of its folly and rather joc- 356 DE RAAD AND BARELDS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
ular character in favor of the more typical Big Five connotation of Extraversion .
Seven factors .
At the seven-factor level , a new factor called Hedonism was identified by items such as sensation-loving , fortune-hunter , flatters people , seeks profit , seeks pleasure , and wild versus charming , meticulous , discrete , chaste , and consistent .
These items are quite consistent with characteristics that are typ- ical of a hedonic lifestyle ( Kunzmann , Stange , & Jordan , 2005 ) , namely enjoyment , materialism , and entertainment .
Some features of the positive side of this factor were also in Extraversion ( e.g. , talkative , likes to have fun ) , and features of its negative side were also in Conscientiousness ( e.g. , meticulous , consistent , and accu- rate ) at the previous level .
The Hedonism factor also conveys central characteristics of Sensation Seeking in such items as seeks pleasure , sensation-loving , wild , and daredevil ( cf .
Zuckerman , 2002 ) .
Eight factors .
One of the burning questions in the present study obviously concerned the full Big Five model .
After four of the Big Five factors had appeared , the question remained whether the “ problematic ” fifth factor , Intellect , would turn up at some point .
This indeed happened with the extraction of eight factors , characterized by such items as complex , philosophical , rebellious , creative , and original .
At first sight , the factor seemed to be a typical representation of the Dutch fifth factor with the rebellious and progressive connotation .
However , most of the typical items of the Intellect pole ( e.g. , creative , versa- tile ) had higher loadings on the Competence factor .
The major- ity of the items loading highest and distinctively on this factor are found on the opposite pole , expressing Conventionality , with items such as obedient , follows the rules , law abiding , plays it safe , docile , and meek .
It is interesting that part of its meaning was drawn from the negative pole of Harmony ( 7/4 ) , as expressed in items such as difficult person , complex person , and seeks confrontation .
The emphasis on Conventionality cor- responds to findings for the six-factor structure ( e.g. , Ashton et al. , 2004 ) and the Big Seven model ( e.g. , Almagor et al. , 1995 ) .
Henceforth , we interpret the present Intellect factor as Conven- tionality .
Nine factors .
The eight previous factors showed up virtually unchanged in the nine-factor solution .
In addition , a ninth factor emerged called Fearlessness , with items such as frank , unabashed , fearless , indefatigable , and daring versus thoughtful , careful , and wise .
Ten factors .
Finally , the 10-factor solution yielded the above-discussed nine factors and , in addition , a new factor that featured aspects of Pathology and Violence , including items such as violent , aggressive , disturbed , psychotic , and merciless versus someone who often rationalizes , curious , eager to learn , and sarcastic .
Although all the 10 factors , which explained 33.1 % of the variance , were quite interpretable , new factors emerging with the solutions with eight ( Conventionality ) , but especially with nine ( Fearlessness ) , and 10 factors ( Pathology/Violence ) , lost sub- stance , explaining less than 1 % of the variance when unrotated .
Moreover , the number of items loading substantially on Factors 9 and 10 were relatively small , and quite a few of those items had higher loadings on other factors .
Splitting the Data Set To help determine the appropriate number of factors , we com- pared two types of factor results , one based on a split of the participant sample and the other based on a split of the variable set .
Splitting the participant sample .
Factor results were com- pared , based on the ratings of the first 700 participants , with those on the basis of the ratings of the remaining 766 particpants .
At this point , the estimation of the appropriate number of factors , as based on the results of the factoring on both the original and the ipsatized data , was around eight factors .
Therefore , for the two subsets of the splitting , factor solutions with seven , eight , and nine factors were extracted , and congruence coefficients were computed between the respective factor sets after target rotation .
The target rotation indicates the extent to which the configuration in one data set can accommodate the configuration in the other data set ( cf .
Kiers & Groenen , 1996 ) .
For the rotation , the factor structure on the basis of the first set of variables functioned as target .
Orthogonal rota- tions were carried out to maximize correspondence .
In the case of seven factors , the congruence coefficients between the corresponding factors after rotation ran from 0.86 to 0.99 , all satisfying strict criteria of factor congruence .
In the case of eight factors , the congruence coefficients between the corresponding factors after rotation ran from 0.90 to 0.99 for the first seven factors , all quite satisfactory ; Factor 8 obtained a relatively less satisfactory congruence of 0.82 .
In the case of nine factors , the congruence coefficients after rotation ran from 0.84 to 0.99 for the first eight factors ; with a coefficient of 0.50 , the ninth factor clearly did not replicate .
Therefore , we considered the eight-factor structure as the tentatively appropriate structure .
Splitting the variable set .
A further test at arriving at the appropriate number of factors was made by randomly splitting the variable set .
Eight factors were extracted in the two subsets of variables , and correlations were calculated after rotating the factors on the basis of one subset to the factors in the other subset as targets , and vice versa ( cf .
Ten Berge , 1986 ) .
Of the two sets of correlations , those between the corresponding factors were aver- aged .
The resulting correlations indicate clear replication of the first seven factors ( correlations running from .89 to .96 ) and suboptimal replication of Factor 8 ( .76 ) .
Self- versus other-ratings .
In order to check whether the final structure was not mainly determined by the larger number of other-ratings , separate factor analyses were performed on the 391 self-ratings and on the 1,075 other-ratings .
Eight factors were extracted in both cases .
Both sets of factors represented the eight factors described in Table 4 , the exception being the Hedonism factor based on self-ratings .
There , this factor was mixed with items known as markers of the negative pole of Honesty-Humility , referring to boastfulness , greediness , and vanity .
An Eight-Factor Structure of Personality Traits The final conclusion regarding the number of factors was based on the results following the splittings of the data set .
We main- tained the eight-factor structure , because of its stability for the first seven factors and its relative stability of Factor 8 , because of its interpretability , and its inclusion of the Big Five , albeit with the Conventional version of the Intellect factor .
The eight-factor struc- ture added substantial and meaningful factors to the Big Five .
The 357A NEW TAXONOMY OF DUTCH PERSONALITY TRAITS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
factors are briefly presented in Table 4 , each with some constitut- ing items per factor pole ( as a rule , the first few high loading items ) and some examples of items to represent the larger distribution of meaning per factor pole .
None of the new factors , beyond the Big Five , received labels of candidates of the possible new factors mentioned earlier , Honesty- Humility , Positive Valence ( PV ) , and Negative Valence ( NV ) .
This does not mean that ( clusters of ) variables representing such constructs might not be detectable in the data set .
To enable such a detection , we used the Honesty-Humility 30-markers scale ( see Appendix ) , and we identified markers for both PV and NV in our item set .
Moreover , for a further understanding of the eight factors , we also correlated both the Big Five marker scales and the six- factor marker scales , used earlier ( see Tables 2 and 3 ) , with the eight factors ( see Table 5 ) .
Honesty-Humility .
In order to assess the extent to which Honesty-Humility can be identified in the eight-factor structure on the basis of the original full data set , we correlated the Honesty- Humility marker scale ( Ashton ) with the eight factors .
Honesty- Humility correlated .68 with Virtue , .49 with Competence , and .33 with Hedonism .
This picture is generally supported using the Honesty-Humility markers of the six-factor structure .
Honesty- Humility seems to explain a substantial portion of the Virtue factor , which is exemplified in a number of typical Honesty- Humility markers identifiable in Table 4 .
The Virtue factor is , however , of a more comprising nature .
Positive Valence and Negative Valence .
To enable identifica- tion of NV , we used the IPC-7 items published in Benet-Martinez and Waller ( 1995 ) .
We could identify 17 markers of NV ( see the Appendix ) , in our list of 2,331 items , producing an alpha coeffi- cient of 0.88 .
Of PV , we identified 15 markers on the basis of Tellegen , Grove , and Waller ’ s ( 1991 ) list , and on the basis of suggestions made by Tellegen ( A. Tellegen , personal communica- tion , March 6 , 2007 ) .
Four of these markers were equivalents or Table 4 The Eight-Factor Structure of Personality Traits Factor Personality trait Virtue ( 9.9 % ) ( ) A friendly person ; someone one can trust ; a loyal person ; someone with common sense ; a decent person ; a sincere person ; a good person ; an honest person ; a reliable person ; a sympathetic person ; a trustworthy person ; a civilized person ; a polite person .
( ) An unfair person ; someone who pillories people ; an unsympathetic person ; someone who frustrates plans of others ; an obtuse person ; an indecent person ; a swindler ; a treacherous person ; an unreliable person ; a dishonest person ; an annoying person .
Competence ( 5.6 % ) ( ) Someone with spirit ; someone who solves problems ; someone who helps people ; someone with vision ; someone who pulls off things ; someone with an open eye for things ; an inventive person ; a determined person ; an enterprising person .
( ) Someone who gives up easily ; a passive person ; someone who avoids difficulties .
Emotional Stability ( 4.5 % ) ( ) Someone with self-confidence ; someone who is self-assured ; someone who can dismiss things from the mind ; someone who is immune to stress ; a decisive person ; a stable person ; a balanced person ; a relaxed person ; someone who has control over self .
( ) Someone who worries about things ; an uncertain person ; someone who is easily upset ; someone who is easily depressed ; someone who is easily discouraged ; a nervous person ; a vulnerable person ; an unstable person ; someone who is easily moved .
Agreeableness ( 3.1 % ) ( ) A patient person ; a modest person ; a goodhearted person ; a flexible person ; a mild person ; a helpful person ; a good-humored person ; someone who accepts things easily ; someone who can stand criticism ; a compliant person ; a peaceful person .
( ) A bossy person ; someone who orders people around ; someone who is easily irritated ; a dominant person ; someone who wants to have the last word ; someone who snaps at people ; someone who seeks conflict ; someone who does most of the talking .
Conscientiousness ( 2.6 % ) ( ) A disciplined person ; a meticulous person ; someone who works according to structure ; a precise person ; a conscientious person ; someone who works hard ; an industrious person ; someone who does things thoroughly ; a punctual person .
( ) Someone who works in an unstructured way ; someone who lets things slide ; someone who postpones things ; someone who does things halfway , an imprecise person ; a careless person ; an unsystematic person ; an undisciplined person ; a lazy person .
Hedonism ( 2.4 % ) ( ) Someone who rouses public sentiment ; a sensation-seeking person ; someone who likes to behave like a beast ; a fortune hunter ; someone who larks around ; a horny person ; a wild person ; someone who likes to experiment ; an impulsive person .
( ) Someone who behaves impeccably ; someone who behaves unselfishly ; a chaste person ; an incorruptible person ; someone who denies oneself things ; a sober person ; a moderate person ; a home-loving person .
Extraversion ( 2.0 % ) ( ) An open person ; someone who expresses him/herself easily ; someone who shares with others ; a spontaneous person ; an openhearted person ; someone who seeks company ; a talkative person ; an exuberant person ; a happy person ; an extraverted person .
( ) A closed person ; a silent person ; an introverted person ; a reserved person ; a taciturn person ; someone who likes to be in the background ; someone who does not open up easily ; prefers to do things on his/her own ; an individualistic person .
Conventionality ( 1.2 % ) ( ) An obedient person ; someone who goes with the tide ; someone who plays it safe ; one of the crowd ; a conventional person ; a law-abiding person ; a docile person ; a meek person ; one of the herd ; does things perfunctorily ; someone who goes along with everything .
( ) A complex person ; someone who has wanderlust ; a complicated person ; a philosophical person ; a difficult person ; a creative person ; a rebellious person .
358 DE RAAD AND BARELDS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
near equivalents , and 11 ( in italics in the Appendix ) were identi- fied on the basis of our understanding of the intended PV con- struct .
These 15 markers produced an alpha coefficient of 0.83 .
The NV scale ( based on the 17 markers ) correlated .88 with Virtue and close to zero with the remaining seven factors .
The PV scale ( based on the 15 markers ) correlated .80 with Competence and close to zero with the remaining seven factors .
Apparently , the Virtue and Competence factors seem to capture much of the gist of Negative Valence and Positive Valence , respectively .
The Big Five .
Four of the Big Five factors returned reasonably well with correlations running from .63 to .84 ( see Table 5 ) .
Although the relating Conventionality factor and Intellect scale had a substantial correlation of .47 , the marker scale correlated higher with Competence .
The six-factor structure .
The pattern of correlations found for the Big Five reappears for the six-factor structure , but with a reduced relation between the Conventionality factor and the Intel- lect scale and a stronger Intellect meaning of the Competence factor ( .67 ) .
Discussion This study aimed at realizing the psycholexical hypothesis ’ ultimate consequences , namely , to taxonomize all trait-relevant expressions for the construction of a personality trait model .
The presently prevailing model of traits , the Big Five , was constituted largely by a single linguistic category , the trait-descriptive adjec- tive .
We went beyond that single category in the present study and used all carriers of personality descriptive meaning , including trait-descriptive nouns , verbs , adverbs , and natural expressions that do not have a particular type of word to carry its trait meaning .
For the Dutch trait lexicon , the results proved that trait adjectives form an important but semantically insufficient personality vocabulary and that the Big Five is consequently a semantically and dimen- sionally deficient system .
Three more substantial dimensions with trait-descriptive capacity were identified in this study , beyond the Big Five : Virtue , Competence , and Hedonism .
Both Virtue and Competence carry strong evaluative loading .
Competence captures many of the characteristics that are typical of good leadership ( cf .
Hogan & Kaiser , 2005 ) , with such items as someone with spirit , solves problems , has vision , and someone who realizes things .
Hedonism includes important characteristics of Sensation Seeking , a personality dimension with a long research history ( cf .
Zucker- man , 1994 ; see the Sensation Seeking-Hedonism section ) .
The Big Five The Big Five factors , as they had been discovered in the Dutch language ( Brokken , 1978 ; De Raad et al. , 1992 ) on the basis of ratings on trait-descriptive adjectives , were not only recovered in the subset of trait adjectives in the present study but also identified in the full set of trait-relevant expressions .
Yet , there were some differences observed for the fifth adjective-based factor in the new sample .
Moreover , in the full set of trait items , the Intellect factor ( Factor 8 ) , though undoubtedly reminiscent of the “ rebellious ” Dutch Factor 5 , turned out to be relatively weak .
The traits of interest now captured in particular by this factor mainly describe the various aspects of conventionality , for which reason we rela- beled this factor Conventionality .
In the different psycholexical studies performed in the past , two main variants of the “ fifth ” factor appeared , one emphasizing the intellect-imagination ( e.g. , German , Croatian ) contents of the factor and the other emphasiz- ing the unconventionality-progressiveness ( e.g. , Dutch , Turkish ) contents ( cf .
De Raad & Van Heck , 1994 ; Saucier & Goldberg , Table 5 Correlations Between Markers of Big Five and Six Factors , Positive Valence , Negative Valence , Honesty-Humility , and the New Dutch Eight Factors Marker scales Dutch eight-factor structure Virtue Competence Emotional Stability Agreeableness Conscientiousness Hedonism Extraversion Conventionality Big Five factors Extraversion .91 .22 .52 .24 .02 .03 .21 .68 .01 Agreeableness .90 .47 .45 .04 .63 .00 .06 .03 .22 Conscientiousness .91 .37 .42 .05 .08 .65 .34 .02 .10 Emotional stability .89 .22 .30 .84 .05 .01 .12 .03 .08 Intellect .75 .17 .59 .05 .22 .11 .23 .10 .47 Six factors Extraversion .89 .24 .49 .23 .02 .01 .17 .70 .03 Agreeableness .87 .39 .33 .00 .68 .00 .05 .05 .31 Conscientiousness .90 .34 .42 .00 .08 .67 .31 .06 .09 Emotional stability .90 .20 .33 .83 .02 .03 .14 .00 .08 Intellect .78 .33 .67 .04 .00 .02 .12 .09 .38 Honesty-Humility .86 .61 .23 .07 .36 .01 .47 .05 .12 PV .83 .11 .80 .15 .02 .09 .02 .01 .07 NV .88 .88 .13 .08 .04 .04 .11 .03 .08 Honesty-Humility ( Ashton ) a .89 .68 .49 .05 .23 .04 .33 .00 .03 Note .
Big Five marker scales are based on 30 items .
Six-factor marker scales are based on 25 items .
Positive Valence ( PV ) is based on 15 items .
Negative Valence ( NV ) is based on 17 items .
Correlations .40 are in boldface .
a From Ashton et al .
( 2004 ) and based on 30 items .
359A NEW TAXONOMY OF DUTCH PERSONALITY TRAITS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
2001 ) .
In general , much of the trait information that was typical of the Intellect factor may have been exhausted in the now larger number of previous factors .
More specifically , the intellect- imagination contents seem to be deemphasized in favor of the unconventionality-progressiveness contents of the Intellect factor , and now give an intellectual coloring to the Competence factor .
Virtue and Competence The first two of the three factors found beyond the Big Five in the present study were also the first two factors extracted .
They explained most of the variance ( 15.5 % ) , and both have a strong evaluative connotation .
Much of what is contained in the Virtue factor was previously identified in the Greek factor structure ( Saucier et al. , 2005 ) as a Morality factor .
In addition , a substantial amount of variance of Virtue turned out to represent Honesty- Humility traits as identified in Ashton et al .
( 2004 ) .
More typically , Virtue seems to be supportive of the importance of Negative Valence .
On the more classical side , Virtue seems to be reminis- cent of the character connotation of personality .
The importance of Virtue in relation to character has recently been thoroughly ad- dressed by Peterson and Seligman ( 2004 ) .
Competence emerged from the Dynamism factor at the three- factor level ( see Figure 1 ) .
The concept Competence is often , if not usually , used for the description of certain nonpersonality charac- teristics , particularly of the skills and capacities type ( cf .
Roe , 2002 ) .
In the present context , the meaning of the term is explicitly meant to convey dispositional characteristics ( cf .
Spencer & Spen- cer , 1993 ) .
The factor not only includes characteristics of good leadership ( cf .
Hogan & Kaiser , 2005 ) but also stretches to social efficacy , witness items such as helps people forward , stands up for a person , and brings a person to reason .
The reference to the characteristics in which the good leader excels ( being skillful , influential , versatile , creative , etc . )
may explain why this factor also represents kernel characteristics of Positive Valence .
More- over , the intellect-imagination contents of the adjective-based In- tellect factor now codefine this broad Competence factor .
In making a parallel with the structure of intelligence , Hofstee ( 2001 ) proposed the the so-called p-factor , which draws its mean- ing from the positive manifold among the large majority of per- sonality traits ( cf .
Hofstee & Ten Berge , 2004 ) .
It is of interest that the item examples given by Hofstee ( 2001 ) for his p-factor ( e.g. , knows what he or she is talking about , can handle situations , and carries tasks to a successful conclusion vs. talks nonsense , mis- represents facts , and misjudges situations ) could well be used to communicate the meaning of the present Competence factor .
Hof- stee actually used the term competence as a possibly appropriate label for the p-factor .
In retrospect , the more inclusive Dynamism factor at the two-factor level might be a better candidate to capture the generality of the p-factor .
Several of the items of Competence are expressive of Openness to Experience , such as someone with an open eye for things , an inventive person , and a versatile person .
The Big Three The three factors at the three-factor level were not the Big Three—Extraversion , Agreeableness , and Conscientiousness ( e.g. , De Raad & Peabody , 2005 ) .
The highest correlation between any of the three new factors , Virtue , Dynamism , and Anxiety ( see Figure 1 ) , and the Big Three as , for example , contained in the eight-factor solution ( 8/7 , 8/4 , and 8/5 ) was a rather moderate .43 between Virtue ( 3/1 ) and Agreeableness ( 8/4 ) .
Also one of the most obvious alternative three-factorial models , Eysenck ’ s PEN- model , with Psychoticism , Extraversion , and Neuroticism ( cf .
Ey- senck , Eysenck , & Barrett , 1985 ) , was not supported in this three- factor solution .
Anxiety ( 3/3 ) correlated .90 with Emotional Stability ( 8/3 ) as the Neuroticism equivalent .
Virtue ( 3/1 ) may have captured some of the cold , impersonal , and antisocial char- acteristics of Psychoticism , but the relevant correlations of .43 with Agreeableness ( 8/4 ) and .26 with Conscientiousness ( 8/5 ) are too low to account fully for the contents of the Virtue factor .
Honesty-Humility Recently , Ashton , Lee , and Son ( 2000 ) proposed Honesty to be the sixth major factor of personality .
That factor , later called Honesty-Humility , was identified in six or seven languages besides English ( see Ashton et al. , 2004 ) .
In the Ashton et al .
( 2004 ) study , many adjectives were listed as being typical of that sixth factor beyond the Big Five .
The large majority of those terms could easily be identified in the present study .
However , a factor called Honesty-Humility was not identified as such .
In the present study , loyal , honest , humane , reliable , and trustworthy all loaded high on Virtue , with boasting , treacherous , swindler , dishonest , unreli- able , and unfair on the opposite pole .
Other adjectives typical of Honesty loaded on Competence , such as just , truthful , sincere , and credible .
As a matter of fact , most of the adjectives typical of Honesty-Humility loaded substantially on the vector combining Virtue and Competence .
We suggest that the factor Honesty- Humility is subsumed , possibly as a facet , under Virtue and Competence .
Sensation Seeking-Hedonism To define basic factors of personality , Zuckerman ( 2002 ) used scales that had been used as measures of temperament or involved in psychobiological studies of personality .
Thus , scales were se- lected from eight different questionnaires .
Factor analyses on ratings on those scales in different samples supported an “ alterna- tive five-factorial model ” ( Zuckerman , 2002 ) that was particularly distinct for its factor Impulsive Sensation Seeking .
Items defining that factor referred to need for thrills and excitement , a preference for unpredictable situations , and a need for change and novelty .
The present sixth factor , Hedonism , contains many items that are typical of those Sensation Seeking characteristics : a sensation- seeking person , behaves like a beast , fortune hunter , a horny person , a wild person , likes to experiment , impulsive person , extravagant , eccentric , does absurd things , instinctive , and change- able .
In addition , there are many items that give the factor a broader scope , including references to interpersonal joy and the need for friendship , both with a selfish motive .
Becker ( 1999 ) also argued for a sixth factor beyond the Big Five , which he identified as Hedonism/Spontaneity and described by items such as “ excitement-seeking , ” “ spontaneity , ” “ liveliness , ” “ playfulness , ” and “ feeling-orientation ” ( p. 526 ) .
Much of the gist of that factor is found in the present Hedonism factor .
Hedonism clearly in- cludes Sensation Seeking , a factor that could apparently not emerge from representative sets of trait-descriptive adjectives .
Yet , 360 DE RAAD AND BARELDS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
the Sensation Seeking-Hedonism dimension has long been put forward as one of the basic dimensions with a physiological rooting ( e.g. , Carver & Scheier , 2004 ; Larsen & Buss , 2005 ) .
Openness to Experience McCrae ( 1990 ) argued that there are “ of course , many words in English that denote aspects of Openness , such as ‘ wide interests ’ or ‘ prefers variety ’ ” ( p. 123 ) , but these expressions are not adjec- tives .
According to McCrae ( 1990 ) , adjectives do not register the significant ways in which individuals differ regarding Openness to Experience .
McCrae suggested that trait studies should not be restricted to trait adjectives but should follow a more liberal route , including phrases and sentences .
In the present unrestricted ap- proach , we complied more fully with a lexical approach that McCrae ( 1990 ) might have embraced .
The present study provided a somewhat stripped version of the Intellect factor as identified in trait-adjectives-based studies .
The presumably more fundamental ( McCrae , 1990 , p. 123 ) Openness to Experience dimension did not emerge in the present study as a separate factor in an exploratory factor analysis .
Expressions that do represent the various features of Openness to Experience were , however , found in distributed niches of the present eight-factor structure .
The tentative conclusion is that Openness to Experience does not represent a coherent cluster of trait-relevant items as should have emerged from a full personality language covering trait vocabulary .
The Big Seven We did not find the Big Seven plus one ( Almagor et al. , 1995 ) .
Yet , the first two factors of the eight-factor structure , Virtue and Competence , seem to capture much of the substance of Positive Valence and Negative Valence , respectively .
This finding corre- sponds to the “ unrestricted ” characteristic of the construction of the trait vocabulary the present study has in common with Alma- gor et al .
( 1995 ) .
A factor called “ Positive Emotionality ” by Almagor et al .
( 1995 ) was not as such recovered in the present study as a separate factor ; Extraversion comes closest in the representation of that factor , but Positive Emotionality items are also easily identifiable in the Competence ( e.g. , dynamic ) and Emotional Stability ( e.g. , depressed ) factors of the present study .
Word Classes Different word types have been argued to communicate seman- tics differentially .
Goldberg ( 1982 ) argued that trait nouns are typically used for oral communication .
Trait verbs have been least visible in personality taxonomic work ( e.g. , Allport & Odbert , 1936 ) , possibly mainly because verbs are generally understood to refer to phenomena of a transitory nature .
In the present study , we took those differences to be primarily of linguistic value and combined words of all categories in a single trait vocabulary .
Yet , linguistic differences may well have corresponding psychological functions to a certain extent .
In particular , one might ask whether the three additional factors , Virtue , Competence , and Hedonism , are due to word categories other than adjectives .
To check this , we took for each factor the 75 positively and the 75 negatively highest loading items and made a count of the verbs , nouns , and adjectives constituting those items , as represented in the final selection ( see Table 1 , Column 5 ) .
This count produced a 3 ( word categories ) 8 ( factors ) table in which the row and column totals determined the expectations for each cell .
The overall relationship between word categories and factors was tested , using the differences between observed and expected frequencies .
Although the chi-square did not indicate a significant overall relationship , 2 ( 14 , N 1,200 ) 22.37 , p .05 , Hedonism and Intellect were constituted to a lesser extent by verbs and more by adjectives .
From this brief analysis , it is clear that , although this new trait structure is undoubtedly attributable to the inclusion of new words and expressions , the new factors were not particularly constituted by newly used word categories .
A noticeable but possibly not surprising observation was that among the trait adjectives , we distinguished a subset of emotion traits , such as is easily shocked , is easily upset , and is easily touched , and it was only to Emotional Stability that those emotion traits contributed in meaning .
More systematic and in-depth studies are necessary to find out what the specific role is of types of words in constituting the different personality factors .
It should be noted that the latter analysis was based on the distribution of word categories as used in the analyses ( see Table 1 ) .
Shifts of words from one word category to the other have taken place in phrasing the items , but they were rather moderate except for the shift from the noun category to the verb category .
We do not believe that those shifts actually changed the meaning of the words in question .
Conclusions We took the lexical hypothesis to its ultimate consequences and taxonomized the vocabulary of Dutch personality traits , including all types of words .
We constructed a final selection of 2,365 personality descriptive items on which self- and partner ratings were observed .
Preceding the main analyses , we replicated the previously published Dutch Big Five structure using a subset of 441 personality-descriptive adjectives .
We then performed factor analyses with 1–12 factors and subsequently discussed these struc- tures .
In the full data set , the Big Five did not emerge before eight factors were extracted .
We also factored ipsatized data , but that did not result in clearer structures .
We split the data set and found that beyond eight factors , the structure became less invariant .
We thus decided to retain eight factors , which included the original Big Five contents .
The newly discovered personality trait factors are Virtue , Competence , and Hedonism .
Of these , Virtue has approx- imately been observed in other studies , albeit under different names .
This study is not only a replication of a trait taxonomy within one language , which is rather unique , but also the first full taxon- omy of personality descriptive items without any restriction re- garding types of wording .
References Allport , G. W. , & Odbert , H. S. ( 1936 ) .
Trait-names : A psycho-lexical study .
Psychological Monographs , 47 ( Whole No .
211 ) .
1–171 .
Almagor , M. , Tellegen , A. , & Waller , N. ( 1995 ) .
The Big Seven model : A cross-cultural replication and further exploration of the basic dimensions of natural language of trait descriptions .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 69 , 300–307 .
Ashton , M. C. , & Lee , K. ( 2001 ) .
A theoretical basis for the major 361A NEW TAXONOMY OF DUTCH PERSONALITY TRAITS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
dimensions of personality .
European Journal of Personality , 15 , 327– 353 .
Ashton , M. C. , Lee , K. , & Goldberg , L. R. ( 2004 ) .
A hierarchical analysis of 1,710 English personality-descriptive adjectives .
Journal of Person- ality and Social Psychology , 87 , 707–721 .
Ashton , M. C. , Lee , K. , Perugini , M. , Szarota , P. , De Vries , R. E. , Di Blas , L. , et al .
( 2004 ) .
A six-factor structure of personality-descriptive adjec- tives : Solutions from psycholexical studies in seven languages .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 86 , 356–366 .
Ashton , M. C. , Lee , K. , & Son , C. ( 2000 ) .
Honesty as the sixth factor of personality : Correlations with Machiavellianism , primary psychopathy , and social adroitness .
European Journal of Personality , 14 , 359–368 .
Austin , J. L. ( 1970 ) .
Philosophical papers .
London : Oxford University Press .
Becker , P. ( 1999 ) .
Beyond the Big Five .
Personality and Individual Dif- ferences , 26 , 511–530 .
Benet-Martinez , V. , & Waller , N. G. ( 1995 ) .
The Big Seven factor model of personality description : Evidence for its cross-cultural generality in a Spanish sample .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 69 , 701–718 .
Benet-Martinez , V. , & Waller , N. G. ( 1997 ) .
Further evidence for the cross-cultural generality of the Big Seven model : Indigenous and im- ported Spanish personality constructs .
Journal of Personality , 65 , 567– 598 .
Boies , K. , Lee , K. , Ashton , M. C. , Pascal , S. , & Nicol , A .
A. M. ( 2001 ) .
The structure of the French personality lexicon .
European Journal of Personality , 15 , 277–295 .
Bolinger , D. ( 1980 ) .
Language , the loaded weapon : The use and abuse of language today .
London : Longman .
Briggs , S. R. ( 1992 ) .
Assessing the five-factor model of personality de- scription .
Journal of Personality , 60 , 253–293 .
Brokken , F. B .
( 1978 ) .
The language of personality .
Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of Groningen , the Netherlands .
Caprara , G. V. , & Perugini , M. ( 1994 ) .
Personality described by adjectives : Generalizability of the Big Five to the Italian lexical context .
European Journal of Personality , 8 , 357–369 .
Carver , C. S. , & Scheier , M. F. ( 2004 ) .
Perspectives on personality .
Boston : Pearson Education .
Cattell , R. B .
( 1943 ) .
The description of personality : Basic traits resolved into clusters .
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 38 , 476–507 .
Church , A. T. , Katigbak , M. S. , & Reyes , J .
A. S. ( 1996 ) .
Toward a taxonomy of trait adjectives in Filipino : Comparing personality lexicons across cultures .
European Journal of Personality , 10 , 3–24 .
Church , A. T. , Reyes , J .
A. S. , Katigbak , M. S. , & Grimm , S. D. ( 1997 ) .
Filipino personality structure and the Big Five model : A lexical ap- proach .
Journal of Personality , 65 , 477–528 .
Cloninger , C. R. , Svrakic , D. M. , & Przybeck , T. R. ( 1993 ) .
A psychobi- ological model of temperament and character .
Archives of General Psychiatry , 50 , 975–990 .
De Raad , B .
( 1992 ) .
The replicability of the Big Five personality dimen- sions in three word-classes of the Dutch language .
European Journal of Personality , 6 , 15–29 .
De Raad , B .
( 1994 ) .
An expedition in search of a fifth universal factor : Key issues in the lexical approach .
European Journal of Personality , 8 , 229–250 .
De Raad , B .
( 2000 ) .
The Big Five personality factors .
Seattle , WA : Hogrefe & Huber .
De Raad , B. , Hendriks , A .
A. J. , & Hofstee , W. K. B .
( 1992 ) .
Towards a refined structure of personality traits .
European Journal of Personality , 6 , 301–319 .
De Raad , B. , & Hofstee , W. K. B .
( 1993 ) .
A circumplex approach to the five factor model : A facet structure of trait adjectives supplemented by trait verbs .
Personality and Individual Differences , 15 , 493–505 .
De Raad , B. , & Hoskens , M. ( 1990 ) .
Personality-descriptive nouns .
Euro- pean Journal of Personality , 4 , 131–146 .
De Raad , B. , Mulder , E. , Kloosterman , K. , & Hofstee , W. K. B .
( 1988 ) .
Personality-descriptive verbs .
European Journal of Personality , 2 , 81– 96 .
De Raad , B. , & Ostendorf , F. ( 1996 ) .
Quantity and quality of trait- descriptive type nouns .
European Journal of Personality , 10 , 45–56 .
De Raad , B. , & Peabody , D. ( 2005 ) .
Cross-culturally recurrent personality factors : Analyses of three factors .
European Journal of Personality , 19 , 451–474 .
De Raad , B. , Perugini , M. , Hrebı́cková , M. , & Szarota , P. ( 1998 ) .
Lingua franca of personality : Taxonomies and structures based on the psy- cholexical approach .
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology , 29 , 212– 232 .
De Raad , B. , Perugini , M. , & Szirmák , Z .
( 1997 ) .
In pursuit of a cross- lingual reference structure of personality traits : Comparisons among five languages .
European Journal of Personality , 11 , 167–185 .
De Raad , B. , & Szirmák , Z .
( 1994 ) .
The search for the “ Big Five ” in a non-Indo-European language : The Hungarian trait structure and its re- lationship to the EPQ and the PTS .
European Review of Applied Psy- chology , 44 , 17–24 .
De Raad , B. , & Van Heck , G. L .
( Eds . ) .
( 1994 ) .
The fifth of the Big Five [ Special issue ] .
European Journal of Personality , 8 ( 4 ) .
Di Blas , L. ( 2005 ) .
Personality-relevant attribute-nouns : A taxonomic study in the Italian language .
European Journal of Personality , 19 , 537–557 .
Di Blas , L. , & Forzi , M. ( 1998 ) .
An alternative taxonomic study of descriptors in the Italian language .
European Journal of Personality , 12 , 75–101 .
Digman , J. M. ( 1997 ) .
Higher order factors of the Big Five .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 73 , 1246–1256 .
Dunlap , W. P. , & Cornwell , J. M. ( 1994 ) .
Factor analysis of ipsative measures .
Multivariate Behavioral Research , 29 , 115–126 .
Eysenck , S. B. G. , Eysenck , H. J. , & Barrett , P. ( 1985 ) .
A revised version of the psychoticism scale .
Personality and Individual Differences , 6 , 21–29 .
Goldberg , L. R. ( 1981 ) .
Language and individual differences : The search for universals in personality lexicons .
In L. Wheeler ( Ed .
) , Review of personality and social psychology ( Vol .
2 , pp .
141–165 ) .
Beverley Hills , CA : Sage .
Goldberg , L. R. ( 1982 ) .
From ace to zombie : Some explorations in the language of personality .
In C. D. Spielberger & J. N. Butcher ( Eds .
) , Advances in personality assessment ( Vol .
1 , pp .
203–234 ) .
Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum .
Goldberg , L. R. ( 1990 ) .
An alternative “ description of personality ” : The Big-Five factor structure .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 59 , 1216–1229 .
Hahn , D. W. , Lee , K. , & Ashton , M. C. ( 1999 ) .
A factor analysis of the most frequently used Korean personality trait adjectives .
European Journal of Personality , 13 , 261–282 .
Haven , S. , & Ten Berge , J. M. F. ( 1977 ) .
Tucker ’ s coefficient of congru- ence as a measure of factorial invariance : An empirical study .
Unpub- lished manuscript , University of Groningen , the Netherlands .
Henss , R. ( 1998 ) .
Type nouns and the five-factor model of personality description .
European Journal of Personality , 12 , 57–71 .
Hofstee , W. K. B .
( 2001 ) .
Intelligence and personality : Do they mix ?
In J. M. Collis & S. Messick ( Eds .
) , Intelligence and personality : Bridging the gap in theory and measurement ( pp .
43–60 ) .
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum .
Hofstee , W. K. B. , & Ten Berge , J. M. F. ( 2004 ) .
Personality in proportion : A bipolar proportional scale for personality assessments and its conse- quences for trait structure .
Journal of Personality Assessment , 83 , 120– 127 .
Hofstee , W. K. B. , Ten Berge , J. M. F. , & Hendriks , A .
A. J .
( 1998 ) .
How 362 DE RAAD AND BARELDS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
to score questionnaires .
Personality and Individual Differences , 25 , 897–909 .
Hogan , R. , & Kaiser , R. B .
( 2005 ) .
What we know about leadership .
Review of General Psychology , 9 , 169–180 .
Hrebı́cková , M. ( 1995 ) .
The structural model of personality based on the lexical analysis : A Czech replication study of the five-factor model based on a comprehensive taxonomy of personality-descriptive adjectives .
Unpublished manuscript , Institute of Psychology , Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic , Brno .
Kiers , H. A. L. , & Groenen , P. ( 1996 ) .
A monotonically convergent algorithm for orthogonal congruence rotation .
Psychometrika , 61 , 375– 389 .
Kohnstamm , G. A. , Halverson , C. F. , Jr. , Mervielde , I. , & Havill , V. L. ( 1998 ) .
Analyzing parental free descriptions of child personality .
In G. A. Kohnstamm , C. F. Halverson Jr. , I. Mervielde , & V. L. Havill ( Eds .
) , Parental descriptions of child personality : Developmental ante- cedents of the Big Five ?
( pp .
1–9 ) .
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum .
Kunzmann , U. , Stange , A. , & Jordan , J .
( 2005 ) .
Positive affectivity and lifestyle in adulthood : Do you do what you feel ?
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 31 , 574–588 .
Larsen , R. J. , & Buss , D. M. ( 2005 ) .
Personality psychology : Domains of knowledge about human nature .
Boston : McGraw-Hill .
McCrae , R. R. ( 1990 ) .
Trait and trait names : How well is Openness represented in natural languages ?
European Journal of Personality , 4 , 119–129 .
Mershon , B. , & Gorsuch , R. L. ( 1988 ) .
Number of factors in the personality sphere : Does increase of factors increase predictability of real-life cri- teria ?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 55 , 675–680 .
Mischel , W. , Shoda , Y. , & Smith , R. E. ( 2004 ) .
Introduction to personal- ity : Toward an integration .
Hoboken , NJ : Wiley .
Mlačić , B. , & Ostendorf , F. ( 2005 ) .
Taxonomy and structure of Croatian personality-descriptive adjectives .
European Journal of Personality , 19 , 117–152 .
Ostendorf , F. ( 1990 ) .
Sprache und persönlichkeitsstruktur : Zur validität des fünf-faktoren modells der persönlichkeit [ Language and personality structure : Towards the validity of the five-factor model of personality ] .
Regensburg , Germany : Roderer-Verlag .
Pervin , L. A. , Cervone , D. , & John , O. P. ( 2005 ) .
Personality : Theory and research .
Hoboken , NJ : Wiley .
Peterson , C. , & Seligman , M. E. P. ( 2004 ) .
Character strengths and virtues : A handbook and classification .
New York : Oxford University Press .
Roe , R. A .
( 2002 ) .
Competenties–Een sleutel tot integratie in theorie en praktijk van de A & O-psychologie [ Competences–A key towards the integration of theory and practice in work and organizational psychol- ogy ] .
Gedrag & Organisatie , 15 , 203–224 .
Saucier , G. ( 1997 ) .
Effects of variable selection on the factor structure of person descriptors .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 73 , 1296–1312 .
Saucier , G. ( 2003 ) .
Factor structure of English-language personality type- nouns .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 85 , 695–708 .
Saucier , G. , Georgiades , S. , Tsaousis , I. , & Goldberg , L. R. ( 2005 ) .
The factor structure of Greek personality adjectives .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 88 , 856–875 .
Saucier , G. , & Goldberg , L. R. ( 1996 ) .
The language of personality : Lexical perspectives on the five-factor model .
In J. S. Wiggins ( Ed .
) , The five-factor model of personality : Theoretical perspectives ( pp .
21–50 ) .
New York : Guilford Press .
Saucier , G. , & Goldberg , L. R. ( 1998 ) .
What is beyond the Big Five ?
Journal of Personality , 66 , 495–524 .
Saucier , G. , & Goldberg , L. R. ( 2001 ) .
Lexical studies of indigenous personality factors : Premises , products , and prospects .
Journal of Per- sonality , 69 , 847–879 .
Somer , O. , & Goldberg , L. R. ( 1999 ) .
The structure of Turkish trait- descriptive adjectives .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 76 , 431–450 .
Spencer , L. M. , & Spencer , S. M. ( 1993 ) .
Competence at work : Models for superior performance .
New York : Wiley .
Strelau , J .
( 1987 ) .
The concept of temperament in personality research .
European Journal of Personality , 1 , 107–117 .
Strelau , J. , & Zawadzki , B .
( 1996 ) .
Temperament dimensions as related to the giant three and the big five factors : A psychometric approach .
In A. V. Brushlinsky & T. N. Ushakova ( Eds .
) , V. D. Nebylitsyn : Life and scientific creativity ( pp .
260–281 ) .
Moscow , Russia : Ladomir .
Szarota , P. ( 1996 ) .
Taxonomy of the Polish personality-descriptive adjec- tives of the highest frequency of use .
Polish Psychological Bulletin , 27 , 343–351 .
Szirmák , Z. , & De Raad , B .
( 1994 ) .
Taxonomy and structure of Hungarian personality traits .
European Journal of Personality , 8 , 95–118 .
Tellegen , A. , Grove , W. M. , & Waller , N. G. ( 1991 ) .
Inventory of Personal Characteristics # 7 ( IPC7 ) .
Unpublished materials , University of Min- nesota .
Ten Berge , J. M. F. ( 1986 ) .
Some relationships between descriptive com- parisons of components from different studies .
Multivariate Behavioral Research , 21 , 29–40 .
Ten Berge , J. M. F. ( 1999 ) .
A legitimate case of component analysis of ipsative measures , and partialling the mean as an alternative to ipsati- zation .
Multivariate Behavioral Research , 34 , 89–102 .
Ten Berge , J. M. F. , & Hofstee , W. K. B .
( 1999 ) .
Coefficients alpha and reliabilities of unrotated and rotated components .
Psychometrika , 64 , 83–90 .
Van Sterkenburg , P. , & Pijnenburg , W. J. J .
( 1984 ) .
Groot Woordenboek Hedendaags Nederlands [ Van Dale ’ s comprehensive dictionary of con- temporary Dutch ] .
Van Utrecht , the Netherlands : Dale Lexicography .
Wierzbicka , A .
( 1986 ) .
What ’ s in a noun ?
( Or : How do nouns differ in meaning from adjectives ? )
Studies in Language , 10 , 353–389 .
Wiggins , J. S. ( 1973 ) .
Personality and prediction : Principles of personality assessment .
Reading , MA : Addison-Wesley .
Wiggins , J. S. ( 1991 ) .
Agency and communion as conceptual coordinates for the understanding and measurement of interpersonal behavior .
In W. Grove & D. Cicchetti ( Eds .
) , Thinking clearly about psychology : Essays in honor of Paul E. Meehl ( Vol .
2 , pp .
89–113 ) .
Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press .
Woordenlijst Nederlandse Taal .
( 1954 ) .
[ Word list of the Dutch language ] .
s ’ Gravenhage , The Netherlands : Staatsdrukkerij- en Uitgeverijbedrijf .
Zuckerman , M. ( 1994 ) .
Behavioral expressions and biosocial bases of sensation seeking .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
Zuckerman , M. ( 2002 ) .
Zuckerman-Kuhlman Personality Questionnaire ( ZKPQ ) : An alternative five-factorial model .
In B .
De Raad & M. Perugini ( Eds .
) , Big Five assessment ( pp .
377–396 ) .
Goettingen : Hogrefe & Huber .
( Appendix follows ) 363A NEW TAXONOMY OF DUTCH PERSONALITY TRAITS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
Appendix Marker Scales for Honesty-Humility , Negative Valence , and Positive Valence Honesty-Humility modest , discreet , honest , fair , trustworthy , humane , someone with integrity , loyal , unselfish , sincere , straight , righteous , just , faithful , truth loving , boasting ( ) , bragging ( ) , swaggering ( ) , greedy ( ) , indiscreet ( ) , inhumane ( ) , dishonest ( ) , untrust- worthy ( ) , insincere ( ) , unjust ( ) , blusterous ( ) , unfair ( ) , conceited ( ) , bigheaded ( ) , selfish ( ) .
Negative Valence dangerous , someone who brings people down , vulgar , nasty , vicious , annoying , filthy person , malicious , mean , cruel , perverted , depraved , mentally disturbed , sick , maladjusted , disloyal , treacherous .
Positive Valence Refined , nobel , gifted , deserves respect , charismatic , bril- liant , versatile , capable , disseminates ideas , moral authority , judicious , colorful , genius , intellectual power , captivating per- son .
An explanation of the partially italicized words above appears in the Positive Valence and Negative Valence section .
Received January 11 , 2006 Revision received August 8 , 2007 Accepted September 4 , 2007 Members of Underrepresented Groups : Reviewers for Journal Manuscripts Wanted If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts for APA journals , the APA Publications and Communications Board would like to invite your participation .
Manuscript reviewers are vital to the publications process .
As a reviewer , you would gain valuable experience in publishing .
The P & C Board is particularly interested in encouraging members of underrepresented groups to participate more in this process .
If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts , please write to the address below .
Please note the following important points : • To be selected as a reviewer , you must have published articles in peer-reviewed journals .
The experience of publishing provides a reviewer with the basis for preparing a thorough , objective review .
• To be selected , it is critical to be a regular reader of the five to six empirical journals that are most central to the area or journal for which you would like to review .
Current knowledge of recently published research provides a reviewer with the knowledge base to evaluate a new submission within the context of existing research .
• To select the appropriate reviewers for each manuscript , the editor needs detailed information .
Please include with your letter your vita .
In the letter , please identify which APA journal ( s ) you are interested in , and describe your area of expertise .
Be as specific as possible .
For example , “ social psychology ” is not sufficient—you would need to specify “ social cognition ” or “ attitude change ” as well .
• Reviewing a manuscript takes time ( 1–4 hours per manuscript reviewed ) .
If you are selected to review a manuscript , be prepared to invest the necessary time to evaluate the manuscript thoroughly .
Write to Journals Office , American Psychological Association , 750 First Street , NE , Washington , DC 20002-4242 .
364 DE RAAD AND BARELDS Th is d oc um en t i s c op yr ig ht ed b y th e A m er ic an P sy ch ol og ic al A ss oc ia tio n or o ne o f i ts a lli ed p ub lis he rs .
Th is a rti cl e is in te nd ed so le ly fo r t he p er so na l u se o f t he in di vi du al u se r a nd is n ot to b e di ss em in at ed b ro ad ly .
