mcnulty2008.pdf
audLjk1iL11RPdPMHeKfO5_oD3pW-mcnulty2008.pdf.plain.html

Benevolent Cognitions as a Strategy of Relationship Maintenance : “ Don ’ t Sweat the Small Stuff ” .
.
.
.
But It Is Not All Small Stuff James K. McNulty and Erin M. O ’ Mara University of Tennessee Benjamin R. Karney University of California , Los Angeles To maintain intimate relationships in the face of negative experiences , many recommend cognitive strategies that minimize the implications of those experiences for global evaluations of the relationship .
But are such strategies always adaptive ?
Suggesting otherwise , 2 longitudinal studies spanning the 1st 4 years of 251 new marriages revealed that the effects of benevolent cognitions on relationship develop- ment depended on the initial levels of negativity in the relationship .
Cross-sectionally , the tendency to make positive attributions or otherwise disengage global evaluations of the relationship from negative experiences was associated with higher levels of satisfaction in marriages characterized by more frequent negative behavior and more severe problems .
Longitudinally , in contrast , such strategies only demon- strated benefits to healthier marriages , whereas they predicted steeper declines in satisfaction among spouses in more troubled marriages by allowing marital problems to worsen over time .
These findings highlight the limits of purely cognitive theories of relationship maintenance and suggest that widely recommended strategies for improving relationships may harm vulnerable couples by weakening their motivations to address their problems directly .
Keywords : attributions , marriage , longitudinal , positive illusions , enhancement Even partners in satisfying relationships occasionally have neg- ative experiences of each other .
Over the course of long-term relationships in particular , partners will at times misunderstand each other , get irritated , or disagree .
Coping with these moments is one of the many challenges that couples must overcome if they are to remain satisfied with their relationships over time .
What is the optimal strategy for managing negative experiences in an intimate relationship ?
Researchers and practitioners agree that one effective way for partners to cope with such events is through benevolent cognitions , that is , interpreting negative events in ways that allow each partner to maintain positive views of the relationship and of each other ( Neff & Karney , 2005b ) .
For ex- ample , several decades of research on marital attributions have shown that spouses who tend to excuse each other ’ s negative behaviors enjoy higher and more stable marital satisfaction than spouses who tend to blame each other for those behaviors ( for a review , see Bradbury & Fincham , 1990 ) .
Drawing on such find- ings , marital therapists expanded the scope of traditional behav- ioral marital therapies to target not only spouses ’ overt actions but also their cognitive and emotional reactions ( e.g. , Baucom & Lester , 1986 ) .
The idea that there are adaptive ways of thinking about problems has even permeated popular culture , as illustrated by the maxim : “ Don ’ t sweat the small stuff. ” But what happens when it is not all “ small stuff ? ” Are benev- olent cognitions adaptive even for couples facing severe or intrac- table problems ?
The overarching goal of the studies described here was to address these questions by examining whether associations between benevolent cognitions and marital development are mod- erated by the frequency of couples ’ negative behaviors and the severity of their marital problems .
To this end , the remainder of this introduction is organized into four sections .
The first proposes that various benevolent cognitions provide short-term relief from negative experiences within relationships by minimizing the im- plications of those experiences for immediate evaluations of the relationship .
The second reviews research on the long-term impli- cations of such cognitions , noting that previous research has been inconsistent in suggesting whether benevolent cognitions harm or protect relationships over time .
The third attempts to reconcile those inconsistencies by suggesting that the long-term implications of benevolent cognitions for relationships may depend on the types of problems couples face .
Benevolent cognitions may benefit relationships in which partners experience mostly mild or infre- quent problems but may ultimately harm relationships in which partners face severe or frequent problems that require more active responses because such thinking may allow those problems to worsen over time .
The final section provides an overview of two longitudinal studies of married couples that directly examine whether the severity of self-reported relationship problems and the frequency of observed negative behavior moderate the effects of James K. McNulty and Erin M. O ’ Mara , Department of Psychology , University of Tennessee ; Benjamin R. Karney , Department of Psychology , University of California , Los Angeles .
Preparation of this article was supported by a Research Development Award from the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the University of Florida awarded to Benjamin Karney , Institute of Mental Health Grant MH59712 awarded to Benjamin Karney , and an award by the Fetzer Institute awarded to Benjamin Karney .
We thank Chris Adams , Jessica Baker , Krista Bernard , Mark DaSilva , Nancy Frye , Katherine Leong , Sacha Lindekens , Giovanni Montrone , Kimberly Mosler , Lisa Neff , Rachel Nitzburg , Joanna Sadowski , Jennifer Schurman , Jennifer Smith , Kara Sweeney , and Mark Trujillo for their assistance in data collection , observational coding , and data entry .
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to James K. McNulty , Department of Psychology , University of Tennessee , 1404 Circle Drive , Knoxville , TN 37996 .
E-mail : jmcnulty @ utk.edu Journal of Personality and Social Psychology Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 2008 , Vol .
94 , No .
4 , 631–646 0022-3514/08/ $ 12.00 DOI : 10.1037/0022-3514.94.4.631 631 benevolent cognitions on changes in relationship satisfaction , and whether changes in the severity of problems themselves mediate these effects .
Benevolent Cognitions and Immediate Relationship Evaluations A robust literature suggests that satisfied couples use a variety of cognitive strategies to manage negative experiences within their relationships ( for a review , see Karney , McNulty , & Bradbury , 2001 ) .
For example , when asked to describe each other , satisfied partners highlight each other ’ s positive qualities ( e.g. , Murray , Holmes , & Griffin , 1996a , 1996b ) and minimize the importance of each other ’ s negative qualities ( Neff & Karney , 2003 ) .
When asked to describe their relationships , satisfied partners emphasize their most positive experiences ( e.g. , Murray & Holmes , 1993 , 1994 ) and dismiss their more negative experiences ( e.g. , Eidelson & Epstein , 1982 ; Epstein & Eidelson , 1981 ; Neff & Karney , 2003 ) .
When asked to interpret a specific negative experience in the relationship , satisfied partners attribute that experience to tran- sient and external sources ( for a review , see Bradbury & Fincham , 1990 ) .
Even in the face of declining relationship quality , satisfied partners maintain optimism by recalling the present as an improve- ment over the past ( e.g. , Karney & Coombs , 2000 ; Karney & Frye , 2002 ) .
Although these and other strategies have been described as distinct processes of motivated cognition , they share a common theme .
In general , benevolent cognitions allow partners to ac- knowledge specific negative experiences of each other while min- imizing the implications of such experiences for their global eval- uations of the relationship ( Karney , McNulty , & Frye , 2001 ; McNulty & Karney , 2001 ; Neff & Karney , 2005b ) .
A wife with a husband who fails to be supportive , for example , can attribute the negative behavior to her husband ’ s stressful job rather than to his lack of warmth , thereby reconciling the specific negative experi- ence with her globally positive view of the relationship .
McNulty and Karney ( 2001 ) demonstrated this process directly when they asked recently married spouses to rate their experiences with various specific domains of their relationships ( e.g. , communica- tion , support , household management ) and to report their more global evaluations of those relationships , every day for 7 days .
Multilevel modeling revealed that , for spouses who tended to make benevolent attributions for their partners ’ negative behaviors , the covariance between negative experiences and global evaluations across days was significantly weaker than it was for spouses who tended to hold their spouses responsible for negative behaviors .
Benevolent attributions , and possibly other benevolent cognitions , thus appear to operate by protecting partners ’ global evaluations of their relationships from the broader implications of their specific negative experiences ( cf .
Neff & Karney , 2005b ) .
Benevolent Cognitions and Long-Term Relationship Outcomes To be considered effective strategies of relationship mainte- nance , benevolent cognitions must be more than correlates of globally positive evaluations of relationships , however : They must protect global relationship evaluations over time .
There are at least two reasons to expect that they do .
First , to the extent that spouses view their partners and relationships more positively in the present , they should interpret their partners ’ behaviors more positively and behave more positively themselves in the future ( cf .
Murray et al. , 1996b ) .
Second , minimizing the implications of negative experi- ences should allow spouses to avoid conflicts that could prove costly or painful over time .
In line with such reasoning , treatment- outcome studies suggest that supplementing traditional behavioral marital therapies with cognitive interventions can be more effec- tive at improving marital quality than behavioral marital therapies alone ( e.g. , Christensen , Atkins , Yi , Baucom , & George , 2006 ; Jacobson , Christensen , Prince , Cordova , & Eldridge , 2000 ) .
Fur- thermore , several longitudinal studies have demonstrated that , on average , couples who think more benevolently about their rela- tionships are more satisfied with those relationships in the future ( Fincham & Bradbury , 1987b , 1993 ; Karney & Bradbury , 2000 ; Miller , Niehuis , & Huston , 2006 ; Murray et al. , 1996b ; Murray & Holmes , 1997 ; Neff & Karney , 2005b ) .
Nevertheless , other work offers an alternative perspective by suggesting that benevolent cognitions can be costly over time ( Colvin , Block , & Funder , 1995 ; Crocker , Major , & Steele , 1998 ; Dillard , McCaul , & Klein , 2006 ; Major & Schmader , 1998 ; Robins & Beer , 2001 ; Steele , Spencer , & Aronson , 2002 ; Swann , Silvera , & Proske , 1997 ) .
For instance , work outside close relationships suggests that cognitions that disengage evaluations of the self from the implications of failures in specific domains can undermine the motivation to seek improvements in those domains ( e.g. , Crocker et al. , 1998 ; Major & Schmader , 1998 ; Steele et al. , 2002 ) .
Be- nevolent cognitions may have similar implications within relation- ships .
For example , women in abusive relationships who make benevolent attributions for their partners ’ negative behaviors are less likely to end their relationships , thereby exposing themselves to further abuse ( Gordon , Burton , & Porter , 2004 ; Katz , Arias , Beach , Brody , & Roman , 1995 ; Pape & Arias , 2000 ; Truman- Schramm , Cann , Calhoun , & Vanwallendael , 2000 ) .
Accordingly , though benevolent cognitions may provide immediate relief from problems , they may also allow those problems to fester and thus result in lower levels of satisfaction over time .
Indeed , several studies demonstrate that , though avoiding conflict is associated with more positive feelings toward the relationship in the short term , failing to address problems directly can lead to declines in satisfaction over time ( Gottman & Krokoff , 1989 ; Heavey , Layne , & Christensen , 1993 ; but see Cramer , 2003 , and Woody & Costanzo , 1990 ) .
Acknowledging the Context of Benevolent Cognitions How can the seemingly inconsistent findings on the longitudinal implications of benevolent cognitions for relationships be recon- ciled ?
The answer may lie in recognizing a limitation that is common to research that has obtained both sorts of results .
Al- though all studies of the effects of benevolent cognitions explicitly or implicitly address how partners respond to negative experi- ences , research has not yet paid much attention to the nature of the negative experiences themselves .
On the contrary , studies in this vein often examine partner ’ s reactions to hypothetical problems ( e.g. , “ Imagine your partner were cool and distant to you ” ) or experimentally induced problems ( e.g. , presenting partners with bogus evidence that a valued trait may in fact be negative ) .
Even research that has examined partners ’ reactions to actual problems 632 MCNULTY , O ’ MARA , AND KARNEY ( e.g. , Fletcher & Thomas , 2000 ) has not examined the extent to which variability across couples in the sorts of problems they face may be associated with the effects of cognitive processes within those relationships .
Yet , research outside relationships suggests such variability is likely to play an important role in determining the implications benevolent cognitions have for long-term out- comes .
Specifically , whereas the previously described process of disengaging self-esteem from weaknesses in specific domains may be comforting when such weaknesses occur in unimportant do- mains , several authors have argued that dismissing negative feed- back in important domains can lead to missed opportunities to improve those domains or respond directly to potentially construc- tive feedback ( e.g. , Crocker et al. , 1998 ; Major & Schmader , 1998 ; Steele et al. , 2002 ) .
In line with contextual models of relationships ( e.g. , Bradbury & Fincham , 1991 ; Karney & Bradbury , 1995 ) , the long-term effects of benevolent cognitions in relationships may similarly depend on the types of problems to which they are applied .
Because minor and infrequent problems may not affect the relationship , and in any case may resolve on their own with time , benevolent cognitions that minimize the implications of such problems may do little harm to relationships .
In fact , such cognitions may benefit relationships characterized by minor problems by limiting opportunities for negative interactions and promoting positive ones .
However , when applied to severe or frequent problems that are likely to improve only when addressed directly , the same cognitive strategies may allow problems to worsen over time .
Accordingly , relationships characterized by frequent and severe problems may benefit more from cognitions that acknowledge the global implications of spe- cific negative experiences and thus provide the motivation neces- sary to engage in efforts at repair .
We are not aware of research that has directly tested whether the effects of benevolent cognitions on relationship development are moderated by the nature of the problems experienced in the rela- tionship .
However , a closer analysis of the samples addressed by prior research on these issues offers some support for this possi- bility .
Studies suggesting that benevolent cognitions may have long-term costs for intimate relationships have used samples drawn primarily from couples in established ( e.g. , Gottman & Krokoff , 1989 ; Heavey et al. , 1993 ) or even distressed ( Gordon et al. , 2004 ; Katz et al. , 1995 ; Pape & Arias , 2000 ; Truman-Schram et al. , 2000 ) relationships .
In contrast , studies showing that benev- olent cognitions protect relationships have used samples drawn primarily from undergraduate dating couples and newlyweds ( e.g. , Karney & Bradbury , 2000 ; Miller et al. , 2006 ; Murray & Holmes , 1997 ; Murray et al. , 1996b ; Neff & Karney , 2005b ) , populations whose problems , on average , may be less severe than the problems experienced by couples in distressed or established relationships ( e.g. , Amato & Previti , 2003 ; Karney , Garvan , & Thomas , 2003 ) .
Even among these younger couples , variability in the severity or frequency of problems may moderate the effects of benevolent cognitions , but the implications of this variability have yet to be examined directly .
Overview of the Present Studies Though interpreting negative experiences benevolently may al- low partners to remain satisfied with their relationships in the short term , the long-term benefits of such strategies may depend on the nature of the experiences to which they are applied .
Although interpreting minor and infrequent problems positively may avoid unnecessary conflicts , disengaging from more frequent or serious problems may reduce couples ’ motivations to address problems directly , allowing those problems to worsen over time .
Yet , despite the extensive literature on benevolent cognitions in relationships , we are aware of no studies that have directly examined whether the effects of these cognitions are moderated by the types of problems that couples experience .
Research to address this question must ( a ) sample relationships experiencing problems that vary in severity ; ( b ) directly measure that variability ; and ( c ) assess relationship outcomes over substan- tial lengths of time to allow analyses of both short-term and long-term correlates of these cognitive processes .
Accordingly , to examine the role of negativity in moderating the effects of benev- olent cognitions on the course of relationship development , we conducted two studies that met these criteria .
To ensure that any observed effects were not idiosyncratic to a particular measure- ment technique , both studies defined benevolent cognitions and negativity in two conceptually similar yet operationally distinct ways .
To measure benevolent cognitions , both studies assessed ( a ) partners ’ tendencies to make charitable attributions for each oth- er ’ s hypothetical negative behaviors and ( b ) the strength of the association between partners ’ perceptions of specific relationship experiences and their global evaluations of the relationship across a 7-day diary assessment .
To measure negativity within the rela- tionship , both studies assessed ( a ) the self-reported severity of problems encountered in the relationship and ( b ) the quality of couples ’ behaviors during videotaped problem-solving discus- sions , as rated by objective observers .
Both studies also asked couples to report on their marital satisfaction and problem severity every 6 months for the first 4 years of the marriage , a total of eight assessments in each study .
Analyses drew on these repeated as- sessments to examine how aspects of the relationship and specific cognitive strategies interact to account for trajectories of relation- ship satisfaction and trajectories of problem severity over the first 4 years of these marriages .
Given the parallel designs of the two studies , both are described simultaneously below.1 Both studies sampled first-married newlywed couples , a partic- ularly appropriate sample in which to investigate these issues , for several reasons .
First , the early years of marriage are a period of dramatic change for couples , during which they are at elevated risk 1 Data describing participants from both samples have been described in previously published reports .
Data from the couples in Study 1 have been described in several articles ( Frye & Karney , 2002 , 2004 , 2006 ; McNulty & Karney , 2001 , 2002 , 2004 ; Neff & Karney , 2002 , 2003 , 2004 , 2005b ) , but there has been little overlap between the variables examined in these prior studies and the variables examined here .
The two exceptions are ( a ) the diary data from this sample , treated here as an independent variable , were treated as a dependent variable in a previous report ( McNulty & Karney , 2001 ) and ( b ) trajectories of satisfaction from this sample have been treated as dependent variables in prior reports ( McNulty & Karney , 2004 ; Neff & Karney , 2003 ) .
Trajectories of satisfaction have also been examined as dependent variables in studies drawing from the couples in Study 2 ( Neff & Karney , 2005a , 2005b ) .
Despite the overlap in the dependent variables , however , this is the first report using data from any of these studies to examine interactions between benevolent cognitions and observations of behavior or reported severity of problems .
633BENEVOLENT COGNITIONS IN MARRIAGE of marital disruption ( Bramlett & Mosher , 2002 ; Cherlin , 1992 ) .
Second , couples in the early years of marriage are likely to experience an especially wide range of relationship problems , as a number of challenges tend to accompany youth and the transition to marriage ( e.g. , relocation , starting a new job ) .
Thus , the couples examined in these studies were likely to demonstrate significant variability in both the predictors and the outcomes of central interest .
We predicted that , in the short term , a greater tendency to make positive attributions and a greater tendency to separate global evaluations of the relationship from negative specific experiences would be associated with higher levels of satisfaction with the relationship .
We expected this association to be particularly pro- nounced among couples who experienced the most frequent and severe negativity , as such couples should have the most to gain from minimizing the implications of their negative experiences .
However , we predicted that the opposite would be true in the long term : Although benevolent cognitions should predict more stable satisfaction in relationships characterized at the outset by infre- quent and minor problems , these same strategies should predict steeper declines in satisfaction in relationships characterized at the outset by more frequent negative behavior or more severe prob- lems .
Finally , we predicted that any interactions observed between benevolent cognitions and negativity on changes in satisfaction would be mediated by changes in problem severity over time such that thinking benevolently about frequent or severe problems would predict declines in satisfaction through direct effects on increasing problem severity over time .
Method Participants Two independent studies were conducted in a Northern Florida community surrounding a major state university .
In both studies , couples were recruited using two methods .
The first was to place advertisements in community newspapers and bridal shops , offer- ing payment to couples willing to participate in a study of newly- weds .
The second was to send invitations to eligible couples who had completed marriage license applications in counties near study locations .
All couples responding to either solicitation were screened for eligibility in an initial telephone interview .
Inclusion required that ( a ) this was the first marriage for each partner , ( b ) the couple had been married less than 6 months , ( c ) each partner was at least 18 years of age , ( d ) each partner spoke English and had completed at least 10 years of education ( to ensure comprehension of the questionnaires ) , and ( e ) couples did not have children and wives were not older than 35 ( to allow a similar probability of transitioning to first parenthood for all couples , as part of the larger aims of the studies ) .
Eligible couples were scheduled for an initial laboratory session .
Descriptive statistics for both samples are presented in Table 1 .
As the table reveals , participants were of comparable age across both samples , with both spouses in their mid-20s and husbands being slightly older than wives on average .
Reflecting the educa- tion level of the community , participants reported relatively high levels of education , with a large proportion of participants being full-time students at the baseline assessment .
The income level of participants reflects this fact , with the median total combined household income being less than $ 25,000 .
In both samples , the majority of participants were Caucasian ( 80 % ) and Christian ( 60 % ) .
Procedure Procedures were nearly identical in both studies .
Before their laboratory session , participants were mailed a packet of question- naires to complete at home and bring with them to their appoint- ment .
This packet included a consent form approved by the local human subjects review board ; self-report measures of relationship attributions , marital satisfaction , and the severity of marital prob- lems ; and a letter instructing couples to complete all questionnaires independently of one another and to bring their completed ques- tionnaires to their upcoming laboratory session .
Upon arriving to that session , spouses participated in two problem-solving discus- sions designed to assess the frequency of the negative behaviors they tended to exchange during their interactions with each other .
Each spouse identified an area of difficulty in the marriage , and then both spouses participated in two 10-min videotaped discus- sions in which they were left alone to “ work towards some reso- lution or agreement ” for each area of difficulty .
The order of the two interactions was determined through a coin flip .
If both spouses chose the same topic , then they first discussed that topic and then discussed a second topic chosen by the spouse whose topic was designated to be discussed second .
After completing their interactions , couples were paid for participating in this phase of the study ( Study 1 $ 50 , Study 2 $ 70 ) .
After payment , each spouse was given a stack of seven stamped , addressed envelopes , each containing a one-page questionnaire Table 1 Sample Demographics Spouse Age Years of education Full-time employed ( % ) Full-time student ( % ) Income group Caucasian ( % ) Christian ( % ) M SD M SD Mdn .
SD Study 1 ( N 82 ) Husband 25.12 3.32 16.43 2.22 40 54 $ 5K– $ 10K $ 4.83K 83 59 Wife 23.67 2.77 16.35 1.77 39 50 $ 5K– $ 10K $ 4.41K 89 59 Study 2 ( N 169 ) Husband 25.53 4.13 16.48 2.33 59 35 $ 5K– $ 10K $ 7.21K 94 66 Wife 23.84 3.60 16.32 2.01 45 43 $ 0K– $ 5K $ 5.41K 86 63 634 MCNULTY , O ’ MARA , AND KARNEY designed to assess their evaluations of their specific experiences in their relationship that day as well as their global satisfaction with their marriage that day .
Spouses were instructed to ( a ) complete each page independently of one another every night for the next seven nights , ( b ) seal each completed questionnaire in the provided envelopes , and ( c ) place the sealed envelope in the mail the following day .
Couples received $ 1.50 for each page they com- pleted and $ 25 for completing all 14 pages ( i.e. , a bonus for couples who completed all pages ) .
At approximately 6-month intervals subsequent to the initial assessment , couples were recontacted by phone and again mailed marital attributions , marital satisfaction , and marital problems questionnaires , along with postage-paid return envelopes and a letter of instruction reminding couples to complete forms indepen- dently of one another .
This procedure was used at all follow-up procedures except at Time 5 .
The Time 5 assessment resembled Time 1 in that couples completed questionnaires at home and brought them to the laboratory where they engaged in a variety of tasks beyond the scope of the present study .
After completing each phase , couples were mailed a check for participating ( Study 1 $ 40 , Study 2 $ 40– $ 50 ) .
Measures Marital attributions .
Marital attributions were assessed eight times over the 4 years of each study , once every 6 months , using the Relationship Attributions Measure ( Fincham & Bradbury , 1992 ) .
This 24-item measure presents spouses with four negative stimulus events that are likely to occur in all marriages ( e.g. , “ Your spouse criticizes something you say ” ; “ Your spouse does not pay attention to what you are saying ” ) .
For each event , spouses are asked to rate their agreement , on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 ( agree strongly ) to 6 ( disagree strongly ) , with statements that reflect six attribution dimensions .
The measure includes two sub- scales : a Causal Attribution and Responsibility Attribution , each consisting of 12 judgments .
Given high correlations between the two subscales ( Study 1 , husbands ’ r .60 , wives ’ r .60 ; Study 2 , husbands ’ r .62 , wives ’ r .63 ) and given our lack of differential predictions regarding the effects of each subscale , all 24 items were combined in both studies , resulting in a single score for each spouse with possible ranges of 24–168 , with higher scores indicating more negative attributions .
The internal consistency of the total scale was adequate in both studies for Study 1 , coefficient alpha was .88 for husbands and .90 for wives ; for Study 2 , coefficient alpha was .92 for husbands and .90 for wives ) .
Seven-day diary .
Spouses ’ tendencies to disengage their global evaluations of their relationship from their specific experi- ences in the relationship was assessed at baseline through a pro- cedure described by McNulty and Karney ( 2001 ) that draws on the diary assessments .
To measure spouses ’ daily perceptions of their experiences , spouses were asked to evaluate , every day for 7 days , nine specific aspects of the marriage chosen to represent various potential sources of negative experiences that could vary daily .
Each night , spouses evaluated that day ’ s experiences of ( a ) their sex life , ( b ) their partner ’ s physical appearance , ( c ) their partner ’ s social skills , ( d ) the way their partner contributed to household chores , ( e ) how their partner supported them , ( f ) their partner ’ s intellect , ( g ) their interactions with their partner , ( h ) the time spent together with their partner , and ( i ) the way disagreements were resolved .
To measure spouses ’ daily global evaluation of the relationship , each night spouses also responded to the following three items modified from the Kansas Marital Satisfaction Scale ( Schumm et al. , 1986 ) : ( a ) “ How satisfied were you with your partner today ? ” ( b ) “ How satisfied were you with your relationship with your partner today ? ” and ( c ) “ How satisfied were you with your marriage today ? ” Participants responded to all items on a 7-point Likert scale , where 1 very unsatisfied and 7 very satisfied .
The internal consistency of each subscale was relatively high across both studies ( for items measuring evaluations of spe- cific experiences , coefficient alpha ranged between .82 and .94 for husbands and between .82 and .94 for wives ; for items measuring global satisfaction , coefficient alpha ranged between .90 and .97 for husbands and between .89 and .96 for wives , across both studies ) .
To estimate the extent to which spouses ’ global and specific ratings of the marriage covaried across days , the within- person association between the daily sum of their perceptions of their specific experiences and the daily sum of their global eval- uations of the relationship was estimated using the first level of a multilevel model ( a more detailed description of the analysis appears in the Overview of Data Analyses section ) , in which weaker associations indicate greater disengagement of global eval- uations from specific perceptions and stronger associations indi- cate less disengagement of global evaluations from specific per- ceptions and presumably represent less effective relationship enhancement .
Observed negative behavior .
The prevalence of negative be- havior in each marriage was estimated at baseline by coding videotapes of couples ’ problem-solving discussions for negative versus positive behavior using a modified version of the Verbal Tactics Coding Scheme ( Sillars , Coletti , Parry , & Rogers , 1982 ) .
Each speaking turn from each spouse was coded .
A speaker received an Avoidant code for speaking turns that were off-topic or moved the discussion away from the problem at hand .
A speaker received a Negative code for speaking turns that either directly faulted , rejected , or criticized the partner , or indirectly criticized the partner through presumptive attributions , avoiding responsibil- ity , or hostile questions .
A speaker received a Constructive code for speaking turns that were on-topic and not negative ( Study 1 ) or furthered the resolution of the conflict ( Study 2 ) .
To determine the reliability of our coding , a subset of the discussions ( 30 % in Study 1 and 25 % in Study 2 ) were randomly chosen to be coded by a second rater , and agreement between coders was assessed by calculating intraclass correlation coeffi- cients ( ICC ) between the proportions of speaking turns coded as constructive and negative by each coder .
Reliability was adequate in both studies ( in Study 1 , ICC for Constructive .96 , ICC for Negative .75 ; in Study 2 , ICC for Constructive .82 , ICC for Negative .89 ) .
A total proportion of negative behavior and a total proportion of constructive behavior exhibited by each husband and each wife was computed for each conversation by dividing the number of codes for each spouse by the total number of speaking turns for that spouse in that conversation .
We then obtained an estimate of the relative negativity exhibited by each spouse in each conversa- tion by subtracting the proportion of Constructive codes from the proportion of Negative codes exhibited by that spouse .
Accord- ingly , scores on each conversation could range from 1.0 , indi- cating that every speaking turn was positive , to 1.0 , indicating that 635BENEVOLENT COGNITIONS IN MARRIAGE every speaking turn was negative .
Furthermore , given that the behavior of both partners affects the relationship ( e.g. , Gottman & Krokoff , 1989 ; Huston & Vangelisti , 1991 ; Karney & Bradbury , 1997 ) , we developed a couple-level index of the frequency of net negative marital behavior by averaging across conversations and across husbands ’ and wives ’ scores ( for Study 1 , r .58 ; for Study 2 , r .46 ) .
In Study 1 , husbands ’ and wives ’ discussions were coded for all 82 couples .
Thus , behavioral data were available for 100 % of that sample .
However , due to technical difficulties , some discussions in Study 2 were unable to be coded .
Specifically , 27 ( 8 % ) of the 338 conversations in Study 2 were not coded .
Nevertheless , because the indices of negative behavior were calculated by averaging across both conversations from each couple , and because codes from both conversations were missing from only 6 couples , be- havioral data were available for 163 ( 96 % ) of the 169 couples in that study .
The interactions that could not be coded in Study 2 were randomly distributed across all interactions , suggesting no system- atic bias in the types of interactions that could not be coded .
Indeed , couples missing behavioral data did not differ on the variables of interest .
Severity of relationship problems .
The severity of partners ’ relationship problems was assessed eight times over the 4 years of each study , once every 6 months , using a modified version of the Marital Problems Inventory ( Geiss & O ’ Leary , 1981 ) .
This mea- sure lists 19 potential problem areas in a marriage ( e.g. , money management , trust , making decisions , in-laws , sex , showing affec- tion ) and asks participants to rate each item on a scale from 1 ( not a problem ) to 11 ( major problem ) .
Spouses ’ ratings of each item were averaged to form an index of average problem severity that could range from 1 to 11 .
Though spouses reporting one area of the relationship to be a problem should not necessarily be expected to report other areas of the relationship to be a problem , internal consistency of the measure was high in both studies across all assessments ( in Study 1 , coefficient alpha was .88 for husbands and .89 for wives ; in Study 2 , coefficient alpha was .88 for husbands and .87 for wives ) .
Marital satisfaction .
Marital satisfaction was assessed eight times over the 4 years of each study , once every 6 months .
Most commonly used measures of marital satisfaction ask spouses to report their global sentiments toward the marriage as well as their level of agreement about specific problem areas ( e.g. , the Marital Adjustment Test ; Locke & Wallace , 1959 ) .
As several authors have pointed out ( e.g. , Fincham & Bradbury , 1987a ) , the use of such omnibus measures can lead to inflated associations with other variables that also address relationship processes , such as the cognitions being examined here .
To ensure that global sentiments toward the relationship were not confounded with the benevolent cognitions measured in the present study and to ensure that any results were not idiosyncratic to a specific instrument , two mea- sures of marital satisfaction were used that assess global evalua- tions of the relationship exclusively .
The first measure was the Quality Marriage Index ( QMI ; Norton , 1983 ) .
The QMI is a six-item scale asking spouses to report the extent to which they agree or disagree with general statements about their marriage ( e.g. , “ We have a good marriage ” and “ My relationship with my partner makes me happy ” ) .
Five items ask spouses to respond according to a 7-point scale , whereas one item asks spouses to respond according to a 10-point scale , yielding scores from 6 to 45 .
High scores reflect more positive satisfaction with the relationship .
Internal consistency of this measure was high across all phases of both studies ( across all phases of both studies , coefficient alpha was at least .92 for husbands and .93 for wives ) .
The second measure of global marital satisfaction was a version of the Semantic Differential ( SMD ; Osgood , Suci , & Tannenbaum , 1957 ) that asks spouses to rate their perceptions of their relation- ship on 7-point scales between 15 pairs of opposing adjectives ( e.g. , bad –good , dissatisfied–satisfied , unpleasant–pleasant ) .
The SMD yields scores from 15 to 105 .
Higher scores reflect more positive satisfaction with the relationship .
Internal consistency of this measure was high across all phases of both studies ( across all phases of both studies , coefficient alpha was at least .91 for husbands and .93 wives ) .
Overview of Data Analyses Data analyses proceeded in three steps .
First , we used hierar- chical linear modeling ( HLM ; Bryk & Raudenbush , 2002 ) , imple- mented using the HLM/2L computer program ( Bryk , Raudenbush , & Congdon , 2004 ) , to estimate the covariance between each spouse ’ s global evaluations and specific experiences over the 7-day diary period .
That is , the sum of each spouse ’ s daily global evaluations was regressed onto the person-centered sum of their specific ratings , providing an estimate for each spouse of the extent to which variability in that spouse ’ s global evaluations across days was associated with variability in his or her specific experiences across days .
These estimates were then used as a measure of benevolent cognitions in subsequent analyses .
Second , we con- ducted growth curve modeling ( Bryk & Raudenbush , 1987 ) to estimate trajectories of change in marital satisfaction and marital problems for each spouse over the 4 years of each study .
That is , spouses ’ reports of satisfaction and marital problems ( up to eight reports total ) were regressed onto the time of those reports , where time was defined as the wave of data collection .
Third , we per- formed between-subjects analyses to predict ( a ) initial levels of marital satisfaction ; ( b ) change in satisfaction over time ; and ( c ) changes in problems over time as a function of benevolent cogni- tions ( attributions and global/specific covariance estimates ob- tained in the first step of the analyses ) , negativity ( observed negative behavior or problem severity ) , and their interactions .
Given the desire to predict changes in marital development inde- pendent of relationship stability , all these between-subjects anal- yses additionally controlled for whether the relationship remained intact or dissolved over the 4 years of the study .
Furthermore , given that the same instruments and methods were used in both studies , all between-subjects analyses combined participants across the studies but controlled for variability unique to each study .
Results Describing the Covariance Between Global and Specific Evaluations The association between spouses ’ global evaluations of the marriage and their specific experiences over the 7-day diary was assessed using the following Level 1 HLM model , estimated 636 MCNULTY , O ’ MARA , AND KARNEY separately for husbands and wives , in which husbands ’ and wives ’ ratings of specific experiences were centered around their means : Yij global evaluations 0j 1jratings of specific experiences eij .
( 1 ) Accordingly , Yij is the global score for individual j on a given day ; 0j estimates the average global score for individual j across days ; 1j captures the covariance between variability in daily ratings of experiences and variability in daily global satisfaction for individ- ual j ; and eij is the residual variance in repeated measurements for individual j , assumed to be independent and normally distributed across spouses .
Thus , 1j represents our estimate of the extent to which partners effectively disengaged their global evaluations of the relationship from their negative experiences through benevo- lent cognitions , with weaker associations indicating greater disen- gagement .
Ordinary least squares estimates of these covariances were ob- tained from residual files produced by these HLM analyses .
Such estimates were available for each participant who provided a minimum of three completed assessments .
Of the 82 couples in Study 1 , 76 ( 93 % ) returned at least three assessments , and 88 % of spouses returned all seven assessments .
Of the 169 spouses in Study 2 , 135 ( 80 % ) returned at least three assessments , and 70 % of spouses returned all seven assessments .
Thus , covariance scores between global evaluations and specific experiences were esti- mated for 93 % of the sample from Study 1 and 80 % of the sample from Study 2 .
The results of these analyses are presented in Table 2 .
T tests indicate that , in both studies , the sum of each spouse ’ s daily global evaluations of the relationship covaried significantly and posi- tively with the sum of daily evaluations of their specific experi- ences in those relationships across days .
That is , husbands ’ and wives ’ global ratings tended to be higher than average on days that they evaluated their specific experiences more positively than average and lower than average on days that they evaluated their specific experiences less positively than average .
Nevertheless , in both studies , the significant chi-square tests of the between- subjects variance in these estimates indicate that the degree of association between spouses ’ global and specific ratings varied significantly across spouses .
In other words , some spouses ap- peared to be more effective than others at disengaging their global evaluations of the marriage from the implications of their specific experiences of the marriage each day .
A primary aim of the present studies was to examine how differences in this ability are associ- ated with relationship development .
Other Preliminary Analyses Descriptive statistics for the remaining independent variables for both studies are presented in Table 3 .
As would be expected in samples of newlyweds , on average , husbands and wives tended to make charitable attributions for their partners ’ negative behaviors and tended on average to rate their problems as not very severe .
Moreover , on average , spouses were rated by observers as engag- ing in more positive than negative behavior during their problem- solving discussions.2 Nevertheless , consistent with the idea that the newlywed period can also be a time of transition and adjust- ment , standard deviations for all independent variables reveal substantial between-person variability .
Correlations among all independent variables are presented in Table 4 .
Several results are worth highlighting .
First , rates of observed negative behavior and self-reported problem severity were positively associated for wives in both studies and for hus- bands in Study 2 , suggesting that spouses who exhibited more negative behavior also tended to report more severe problems .
Second , reports of problem severity were significantly positively associated with attributions across both studies for both husbands and wives , and with the association between global and specific perceptions across both studies for husbands and in Study 2 for wives .
Thus , spouses who tended to report more severe problems tended to engage in more negative cognitions about the relation- ship .
Third , attributions and the global/specific covariance were positively associated with one another in Study 2 , suggesting that spouses in that study who used one strategy of relationship en- hancement tended to use other strategies .
Nevertheless , demon- strating the statistical independence of these two measures of benevolent cognitions , the majority of the variance between them 2 The notable difference between means of behavior across the two studies can be attributed to the more conservative codes for constructive behavior used in Study 2 .
As reported in the description of the coding system : A speaker received a Constructive code for speaking turns that were on-topic and not negative ( Study 1 ) or furthered the resolution of the conflict ( Study 2 ) .
Nevertheless , given that extraneous sources of variance between the two studies , like this one , were controlled in the analyses , this minor variation in methodology across the two studies does not have implications for the results reported here .
Table 2 Within-Subject Covariance Between Ratings of Specific Aspects of the Marriage and Global Evaluations of the Marriage Across 7 Days Study Husband Wife M SD t 2 M SD t 2 Study 1 0.24 0.09 15.75*** 196.47*** 0.21 0.09 13.23*** 168.68*** Study 2 0.20 0.11 16.10*** 396.69*** 0.19 0.12 15.05*** 419.99*** Note .
Higher covariance scores indicate less disengagement of global evaluations from specific perceptions .
Significant ts indicate significant associations between global evaluations and specific perceptions across days .
Significant chi-squares indicate that some spouses disengaged global evaluations from specific perceptions more than others .
*** p .001 .
637BENEVOLENT COGNITIONS IN MARRIAGE in Study 2 was unshared , and the correlations between them in Study 1 did not reach significance .
Finally , consistent with other research on newlyweds ( Filsinger & Thoma , 1988 ; Karney & Bradbury , 1997 ) , correlations between problem-solving behavior and the other independent variables assessed in these studies generally failed to reach significance , with the exception that wives in Study 1 who behaved more negatively also made more negative attributions .
With respect to the cross-spouse correlations , three results are worth highlighting .
First , husbands ’ and wives ’ reports of their attributions were not significantly correlated in either study , sug- gesting that husbands and wives did not demonstrate strong ten- dencies to interpret negative events in their marriages the same way .
Second , in contrast , husbands ’ and wives ’ global/specific covariances were significantly positively correlated in both stud- ies , suggesting that spouses tended to separate their specific expe- riences from their global evaluations to a similar degree .
Finally , in both studies , partners tended to agree about the severity of the problems they faced in their marriages .
Describing Trajectories of Marital Satisfaction Growth curve modeling ( see Bryk & Raudenbush , 1987 ) was used to estimate within-person change in satisfaction over the 4 years of each study .
Specifically , the following model was esti- mated , in which husbands ’ and wives ’ parameters were estimated simultaneously using a multivariate technique suggested by Rau- denbush , Brennan , and Barnett ( 1995 ) : Yijmarital satisfaction 1ijdummy code for husbands 2ijdummy code for wives 3ijhusbands ’ time of assessment 4ijwives ’ time of assessment eij .
( 2 ) Accordingly , Yij is the marital satisfaction of individual j at Time i ; 1ij is the marital satisfaction of husband j at Time 0 ( i.e. , the initial satisfaction for husband j ) ; 2ij is the marital satisfaction of wife j at Time 0 ( i.e. , the initial satisfaction for wife j ) ; 3ij is the rate of linear change in marital satisfaction of husband j ; 4ij is the rate of linear change in marital satisfaction of wife j ; and eij is the residual variance in repeated measurements for spouse j , assumed to be independent and normally distributed across spouses .
This model can be understood as a within-subjects regression of an individual ’ s marital satisfaction score onto time of assessment , in which time was defined as the wave of data collection .
Given that scores on marital attributions were available at every time point , we were able examine the effects of baseline attribu- tions on changes in satisfaction , controlling for the extent to which subsequent changes in attributions covaried with subsequent changes in marital satisfaction by entering each spouse ’ s attribu- tions scores into Equation 2 as a time-varying covariate centered around the group mean , following Karney and Bradbury ( 2000 ) .
Thus , the following Level 1 model was estimated for all analyses involving marital attributions , in which husbands ’ and wives ’ attribution scores were centered around their means : Yij marital satisfaction 1ij dummy code for husbands 2ij dummy code for wives 3ij husbands ’ time of assessment 4ij wives ’ time of assessment 5ij husbands ’ attributions 6ij wives ’ attributions eij .
( 2a ) Accordingly , 5ij captures the association between changes in marital satisfaction and changes in marital attributions for hus- bands , and 6ij captures the association between changes in marital satisfaction and changes in marital attributions for wives .
Because data on the global/specific covariance , as assessed through the 7-day diary , were not available at all eight time points , this stringent control was unavailable to us when examining the effects of that covariance on changes in satisfaction over time .
Table 3 Descriptive Statistics for Independent Variables Measured at Time 1 Measure Husbands Wives M SD M SD Attributions Study 1 75.76 20.64 79.74 21.77 Study 2 81.53 18.51 75.90 20.95 Average problem severity Study 1 2.74 1.25 2.53 1.28 Study 2 2.68 1.18 2.47 1.12 Negative behavior Study 1 0.67 0.21 0.67 0.21 Study 2 0.08 0.13 0.08 0.13 Note .
Negative behavior Negative turns–positive turns ; thus , higher scores indicate more negativity ( but see Footnote 2 in text ) .
Higher attri- butions scores indicate more negative attributions .
Table 4 Correlations Among Predictors Predictor 1 2 3 4 Study 1 1 .
Attributions .05 .04 .41** .27* 2 .
Diary covariance .09 .36** .09 .02 3 .
Problem severity .46*** .20† .32** .34** 4 .
Negative behavior .02 .09 .05 — Study 2 1 2 3 4 1 .
Attributions .13 .17* .40** .11 2 .
Diary covariance .24** .24** .37** .07 3 .
Problem severity .43*** .34** .35** .30** 4 .
Negative behavior .11 .12 .16* — Note .
Wives ’ correlations appear above the diagonal , husbands ’ correla- tions appear below the diagonal , and correlations between husbands and wives appear on the diagonal in bold .
The Diary covariance estimates the association between global evaluations and specific experiences , with higher scores indicating less disengagement .
Higher attributions scores indicate more negative attributions .
† p .10 .
* p .05 .
** p .01 .
*** p .001 .
638 MCNULTY , O ’ MARA , AND KARNEY Of the 82 marriages in Study 1 , 17 ( 21 % ) were dissolved at Time 8 .
Of the 169 marriages in Study 2 , 20 ( 12 % ) were dissolved at Time 8 .
Nevertheless , because trajectories could be computed for all spouses who participated in three or more assessments , the majority of these couples were included in the analyses .
Specifi- cally , growth curve analyses were based on 92 % of the sample in Study 1 and 93 % of the sample in Study 2 .
Dissolution was controlled in all analyses .
Mean estimates and standard deviations of the growth curve parameters from both studies , as estimated by Equation 2 , are presented in Table 5 .
As the table reveals , husbands and wives , on average , tended to report relatively high levels of satisfaction initially but then tended to experience significant declines in satisfaction over time .
Nevertheless , according to the significant chi-square tests of the between-subjects variance ( reported in each spouse ’ s last column of Table 5 ) , there was substantial between- subjects variability in all parameters of these trajectories , suggest- ing that some spouses began the relationship with higher or lower levels of satisfaction than others and that some spouses experi- enced more or less change in their satisfaction than others .
( For references to other studies reporting descriptions of these trajec- tories , see Footnote 1 . )
The primary aim of the present studies was to examine whether such variability could be explained by the interaction between benevolent cognitions and the frequency and severity of negativity in the relationship .
Do negative behavior and problem severity moderate associa- tions between benevolent cognitions and initial marital satisfac- tion ?
Before addressing whether observed negative behavior and reported severity of problems moderate associations between be- nevolent cognitions and changes in marital satisfaction , we exam- ined whether such interactions account for variance in spouses ’ initial levels of satisfaction , that is , the intercepts of the trajectories estimated by Equations 2 and 2a .
For these analyses , each measure of benevolent cognitions ( attributions and the global/specific co- variance ) was grand centered and separately entered into a second- stage analysis , along with each grand-centered measure of nega- tivity ( observations of behavior or reports of problem severity ) , the appropriate interaction term , and a dummy code representing whether the relationship remained intact or was dissolved over the 4 years .
As stated previously , given that the same instruments and methods were used in both studies , one analysis was conducted that combined participants across the studies while controlling for extraneous sources of variability unique to each study with a dummy code representing whether the data were obtained in Study 1 or Study 2 .
To ensure that the effects obtained in this analysis did not vary across the two studies , all analyses also tested whether the effects of interest interacted with the methods of either study .
Unstandardized regression coefficients and effect size estimates of all interactions produced by these analyses are presented in Table 6.3 As Table 6 reveals , for wives , both measures of benev- olent cognitions interacted negatively with both problem severity and negative behavior to account for initial levels of marital satisfaction on both measures of marital satisfaction .
For husbands , attributions interacted negatively with negative behavior to predict initial satisfaction in the same way , and the global/specific covari- ance interacted marginally with behavior to predict initial satisfac- tion on the QMI .
Subsequent tests revealed that only one of these effects varied significantly across the two studies ; husbands ’ attri- 3 Presently , there is considerable disagreement regarding the best method to compute estimates of the size of effects obtained though mul- tilevel modeling ( see , e.g. , Roberts & Monaco , 2006 ; Snijders & Bosker , 1999 ) .
Nevertheless , we attempted to approximate the size of the effects obtained here by computed effect size rs using the following formula provided by Rosenthal and Rosnow ( 2007 ) : r t2t2 df Table 5 Trajectories of Marital Satisfaction Measure Husband 2 test of variance Wife 2 test of varianceM SD ta M SD ta Intercepts Study 1b , c SMD 96.12 7.88 — 107.70* 98.78 8.50 — 192.09*** QMI 42.22 3.34 — 94.66† 42.57 3.23 — 151.50*** Study 2d , e SMD 94.97 9.22 — 417.49*** 96.99 9.21 — 396.30*** QMI 41.84 4.36 — 414.86*** 42.29 4.16 — 354.81*** Slopes Study 1 SMD 1.07 1.70 4.54*** 129.34*** 1.67 2.43 5.25*** 247.96*** QMI 0.57 0.78 5.02*** 123.32** 0.80 1.13 5.30*** 230.11*** Study 2 SMD 0.83 1.57 5.04*** 348.58*** 0.77 1.58 4.66*** 371.98*** QMI 0.44 0.77 5.59*** 369.23*** 0.39 0.75 5.04*** 362.54*** Note .
SMD Semantic Differential ( Osgood et al. , 1957 ) ; QMI Quality Marriage Index ( Norton , 1983 ) .
Significant ts indicate significant changes in satisfaction over time .
Significant chi-squares indicate significant variability across spouses .
a The t test of the intercepts addresses the hypothesis that the intercepts differ significantly from zero ( reflected by dashes ) .
Because the lowest possible score on each of these measures is greater than zero , these tests are not meaningful and hence are not reported .
b df 81 for t test .
c df 78 for 2. d df 168 for t test .
e df 163 for 2 .
† p .10 .
* p .05 .
** p .01 .
*** p .001 .
639BENEVOLENT COGNITIONS IN MARRIAGE butions and negative behavior negatively interacted to predict initial satisfaction on the QMI more strongly in Study 2 than in Study 1 , t ( 235 ) 1.98 , p .05 .
Finally , though interactive effects emerged as significant more consistently among wives , focused tests indicated a significant gender difference on only one inter- active effect : The interactive effect of attributions and problem severity predicted initial satisfaction significantly more strongly on the SMD for wives than for husbands , 2 ( 1 , N 251 ) 6.02 , p .05 , and marginally more strongly on the QMI for wives than for husbands , 2 ( 1 , N 251 ) 3.64 , p .05 .
All significant interactions were deconstructed by plotting the predicted means of participants who were one standard deviation above and below the mean on each variable involved in the interaction ( cf .
Cohen & Cohen , 1983 ) , as recommended by Aiken and West ( 1991 ) .
The pattern of the interactions for each outcome replicated across partners and across measures .
Given this consis- tency , the Panels A and C of Figure 1 depict two interactions to represent the pattern that was the same in all of the other signifi- cant interactions : The interaction between husbands ’ attributions and observations of negative behavior and the interaction between wives ’ attributions and reports of problem severity .
As can be seen in the figure , benevolent cognitions were positively associated with initial satisfaction , as expected , but this association emerged most strongly among partners experiencing more frequent or se- vere negativity .
In marriages characterized by less frequent nega- tive behavior and less severe problems , associations between be- nevolent cognitions and initial satisfaction appeared weak or nonexistent .
The fact that associations between relationship en- hancement and positive outcomes are muted in relationships with fewer and less severe problems is understandable : Explaining away negative events can benefit relationships only when there are negative events to explain away .
In summary , benevolent cogni- tions appear to be associated with relationship satisfaction in expected ways , in the short term .
Do negative behavior and problem severity moderate associa- tions between benevolent cognitions and subsequent changes in relationship outcomes ?
The central question we addressed in the present study was whether observed negative behavior and re- ported problem severity moderate the effects of benevolent cog- nitions on subsequent changes in marital satisfaction over time .
To examine this possibility , the same analysis strategy described above was adopted to account for variability in the slopes of the marital satisfaction trajectories , controlling for the effects on the intercept described above .
Specifically , each grand-centered mea- sure of benevolent cognitions ( attributions and the global/specific covariance ) was separately entered into a second-stage analysis , along with each grand-centered measure of negativity ( observa- tions of behavior or reports of problem severity ) , the appropriate interaction term , a code representing dissolution , and a code rep- resenting study , to account for between-subject differences in the slopes of the marital satisfaction .
Again , when the effects of baseline attributions were estimated , the time-varying association between attributions and marital satisfaction was controlled , as described in Equation 2a .
Unstandardized regression coefficients and effect size estimates of all interactions are presented in Table 7 .
As the table reveals , interactive effects again emerged with respect to each measure of benevolent cognitions , each measure of negativity , and changes in satisfaction on both measures , but in the opposite direction from the interactions observed on the intercepts .
Specifically , significant positive interactions emerged for wives in all analyses involving attributions , a significant positive interaction emerged for hus- bands in the analysis involving attributions and behavior on changes in the SMD , and a significant positive interaction for husbands and a marginally significant interaction for wives emerged in the analysis involving the global/specific covariance and changes in the QMI .
Notably , none of these interactions significantly varied in strength across the two studies .
Likewise , although effects emerged somewhat less consistently for husbands , focused tests indicated a significant gender difference on only one interactive effect : The interactive effect of attributions and prob- lem severity predicted initial satisfaction significantly more strongly on the SMD for wives than for husbands , 2 ( 1 , N 251 ) 6.04 , p .05 , and marginally more strongly on the QMI for wives than for husbands , 2 ( 1 , N 251 ) 3.16 , p .07 .
To determine the nature of the significant interactions , they too were deconstructed according to the procedures outlined by Aiken and West ( 1991 ) .
In all cases , the direction of the interactions was consistent with predictions .
Again , given the consistency of the effects , the Panels B and D of Figure 1 depict two interactions to Table 6 Interactions Between Benevolent Cognitions and Negativity Accounting for Initial Marital Satisfaction Interaction Husband Wife SMD QMI SMD QMI B r B r B r B r Attributions Behaviora 0.30 .20** 0.16z .21 ** 0.18 .11† 0.09 .11† Attributions Problemsb 0.03a .07 0.02a .07 0.13b .26 *** 0.06b .22 ** Diary Covariance Behaviorc 17.59 .10 10.86 .13† 35.63 .25** 14.77 .22** Diary Covariance Problemsd 3.50 .07 1.83 .08 6.28 .12† 3.59 .15* Note .
Betas are unstandardized .
Diary Covariance estimates the association between global evaluations and specific experiences , with higher scores indicating less disengagement .
Higher attributions scores indicate more negative attributions .
Different subscripts denote significant or marginally significant differences between husbands and wives in the strength of the interaction .
z indicates the strength of the interaction was stronger in Study 2 .
SMD Semantic Differential ( Osgood et al. , 1957 ) ; QMI Quality Marriage Index ( Norton , 1983 ) .
a df 239. b df 245. c df 200. d df 205 .
† p .10 .
* p .05 .
** p .01 .
*** p .001 , one-tailed .
640 MCNULTY , O ’ MARA , AND KARNEY represent the pattern that was the same in all of the other signifi- cant interactions : the interaction between husbands ’ attributions and observations of negative behavior and the interaction between wives ’ attributions and their reports of problem severity ( the same two interactions depicted for the intercept ) .
As can be seen in the figure , after controlling for their associations with initial levels of satisfaction , although positive attributions and weaker global/ specific covariances appeared to predict more positive outcomes in the context of marriages with few negative behaviors and less severe problems , both measures of benevolent cognitions predicted greater declines in satisfaction over time in marriages facing higher levels of negative behavior or more severe problems .
In summary , the effects of benevolent cognitions on changes in marital satisfaction appear to depend on the frequency and severity of the negativity in the marriage .
Does thinking benevolently about frequent or severe negativity lead to declines in satisfaction through worsening problems ?
Finally , given our premise that thinking more benevolently about severe or frequent problems could undermine satisfaction by al- lowing problems to become more severe over time , we tested whether the interactions observed between benevolent cognitions and negativity on changes in satisfaction were mediated by changes in problem severity .
Krull and MacKinnon ( 2001 ) out- lined procedures to conduct Sobel ( 1982 ) tests of mediation using multilevel modeling .
Following those procedures , we conducted two additional analyses .
First , we conducted an analysis to esti- mate the effects of interactions between benevolent cognitions and negativity on changes in problem severity over time using the following Level 1 HLM models separately for husbands and wives , in which Equation 3 was used when the effects of the global/specific covariance on changes in problems were estimated at Level 2 , Equation 3a was used when the effects of attributions on changes in problems were estimated at Level 2 , and in which husbands ’ and wives ’ attribution scores were centered around their means in Equation 3a : Y ij problem severity 1ijdummy code for husbands 2ijdummy code for wives 3ijhusbands ’ time of assessment A : Husbands ’ Attributions x Negative Behavior on Intercepts B : Husband ’ Attributions x Negative Behavior on Slopes 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 Less Negative More Negative Behavior In iti al S at is fa ct io n More Positive Attributions More Negative Attributions -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 Less Negative More Negative Behavior C ha ng e in S at is fa ct io n More Positive Attributions More Negative Attributions C : Wives ’ Attributions x Problem Severity on Intercepts D : Wives ’ Attributions x Problem Severity on Slopes 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 Less Severe More Severe Problems In iti al S at is fa ct io n More Positive Attributions More Negative Attributions -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 Less Severe More Severe Problems C ha ng e in S at is fa ct io n More Positive Attributions More Negative Attributions Figure 1 .
Interactions between benevolent cognitions and negativity accounting for the trajectory of marital satisfaction .
641BENEVOLENT COGNITIONS IN MARRIAGE 4ijwives ’ time of assessment eij.. ( 3 ) Y ij problem severity 1ijdummy code for husbands 2ijdummy code for wives 3ijhusbands ’ time of assessment 4ijwives ’ time of assessment 5ijhusbands ’ attributions 6iwives ’ attributions eij .
( 3a ) Second , we estimated the association between changes in problem severity and changes in marital satisfaction over time , controlling for the effects of each interaction term at Level 2 , using the following Level 1 HLM models separately for husbands and wives , in which Equation 4 was used when the effects of the global/specific covariance on changes in problems were estimated at Level 2 ; Equation 4a was used when the effects of attributions on changes in problems were estimated at Level 2 ; and in which husbands ’ and wives ’ problem scores were centered around their means in both equations , and husbands ’ and wives ’ attribution scores were centered around their means in Equation 4a : Y ijmarital satisfaction 1ijdummy code for husbands 2ijdummy code for wives 3ijhusbands ’ time of assessment 4ijwives ’ time of assessment 5ijhusbands ’ problems 6ijwives ’ problems eij .
( 4 ) Y ijmarital satisfaction 1ijdummy code for husbands 2ijdummy code for wives 3ijhusbands ’ time of assessment 4ijwives ’ time of assessment 5ijhusbands ’ attributions 6ijwives ’ attributions 6ijhusbands ’ problems 8ijwives ’ problems eij .
( 4a ) As was the case regarding changes in satisfaction , the interac- tion between attributions and negative behavior emerged as a significant predictor of changes in problem severity for both hus- bands ( unstandardized B 3.303 ) , t ( 239 ) 2.32 , p .05 , r .15 , and wives ( unstandardized B 4.513 ) , t ( 239 ) 3.44 , p .001 , r .22 .
These interactions did not significantly vary in strength across the two studies .
Deconstructing these interactions revealed a pattern similar to the one depicted in Figure 1 , except reversed , such that making more positive attribu- tions in relationships characterized by observations of more fre- quent negative behavior was associated with a stronger slope of worsening problems than making more negative attributions in such relationships .
Furthermore , changes in problems negatively predicted changes on both measures of satisfaction for both hus- bands ( for SMD , unstandardized B 4.79 ) , t ( 239 ) 9.53 , p .001 , r .52 ( for QMI , unstandardized B 2.04 ) ; t ( 239 ) 7.15 , p .001 , r .42 , and wives ( for SMD , unstandardized B 6.89 ) , t ( 239 ) 12.54 , p .001 , r .63 ( for QMI , unstandardized B 2.97 ) ; t ( 239 ) 12.52 , p .001 , r .63 , indicating that couples who experienced worsening problems over time became less satisfied over time .
These effects also did not significantly vary in strength across the two studies .
Notably , once changes in problems were controlled , interactions between attri- butions and behavior no longer significantly predicted changes in satisfaction for both husbands ( for SMD , unstandardized B 8.113 ) , t ( 239 ) 0.64 , p .50 , r .04 ( for QMI , unstandardized B 0.143 ) ; t ( 239 ) 0.02 , p .50 , r .00 , and wives ( for SMD , unstandardized B 0.493 ) , t ( 239 ) 0.04 , p .50 , r .00 ( for QMI , Unstandardized B 3.333 ) ; t ( 239 ) 0.49 , p .50 , r .03 , suggesting that changes in problems completely accounted for the interactive effects of attributions and behavior on changes in satisfaction .
Indeed , Sobel ( 1982 ) tests confirmed that changes in problems significantly mediated the effects of the interaction be- tween attributions and negative behavior on changes in marital Table 7 Interactions Between Benevolent Cognitions and Negativity Accounting for Changes in Marital Satisfaction Interaction Husband Wife SMD QMI SMD QMI B r B r B r B r Attributions Behaviora 3.112 .15* 0.812 .08 2.802 .11* 1.612 .14* Attributions Problemsb 0.56a 2 .06 0.22a 2 .05 1.54b 2 .14* 0.40b 2 .11* Diary Covariance Behaviorc 1.91 .06 2.15 .15* 2.09 .08 1.33 .11† Diary Covariance Problemsd 0.53 .06 0.22 .06 0.35 .03 0.15 .05 Note .
Betas are unstandardized .
Diary Covariance estimates the association between global evaluations and specific experiences , with higher scores indicating less disengagement .
Higher attributions scores indicate more negative attributions .
Different subscripts denote significant or marginally significant differences between husbands and wives in the strength of the interaction .
SMD Semantic Differential ( Osgood et al. , 1957 ) ; QMI Quality Marriage Index ( Norton , 1983 ) .
a df 239. b df 245. c df 200. d df 205 .
† p .10 .
* p .05 , one-tailed .
642 MCNULTY , O ’ MARA , AND KARNEY satisfaction for both husbands ( for SMD , z 2.25 , p .05 ; for QMI , z 2.20 , p .05 ) and wives ( for SMD , z 3.32 , p .01 ; for QMI , z 3.32 , p .01 ) .
Discussion Study Rationale and Summary of Results How should couples cope with negative experiences over the course of a long-term relationship ?
Thus far , therapists and re- searchers have assumed that , among other strategies , it is adaptive to protect the relationship through cognitions that disengage global perceptions of the relationship from implications of those negative experiences .
The two longitudinal studies described here , however , demonstrate important limits to this advice : Benevolent cognitions interact with the broader context of the relationship to predict benefits for some partners but significant costs for others .
Specif- ically , although making positive attributions or otherwise disen- gaging global evaluations of the relationships from negative ex- periences was associated with higher levels of initial satisfaction , such associations only emerged for marriages characterized by more frequent negative behavior and more severe problems .
Once these cross-sectional associations were controlled , spouses in rel- atively healthy marriages enjoyed more stable satisfaction to the extent that they thought more benevolently about their problems , but spouses in more troubled marriages experienced steeper de- clines in satisfaction when they engaged in these same strategies .
In some cases , these effects were mediated by changes in the severity of relationship problems , suggesting that thinking benev- olently about serious problems can hurt relationships by weaken- ing motivations to address those problems directly , thereby allow- ing those problems to worsen over time .
Lending strength to these conclusions , the significant interactions between benevolent cog- nitions and negativity emerged across two different measures of benevolent cognitions , two different measures of negativity , two different measures of relationship satisfaction , a measure of rela- tionship problems , and both husbands and wives , and did not vary across two independent studies .
These findings appear to be quite robust .
Nevertheless , one gender difference did emerge in the pattern of results obtained here : The interactive effects of attributions and problem severity on changes in satisfaction were stronger among wives than among husbands .
Though not predicted , the greater predictive power of wives ’ attributions is not surprising for several reasons .
First , other research has shown wives ’ attributions to be more predictive of marital outcomes than husbands ’ attributions ( e.g. , Doherty , 1982 ; Fincham & Bradbury , 1987a , 1987b ) .
In fact , Holtzworth-Munroe and Jacobson ( 1985 ) demonstrated that hus- bands are generally less likely than wives to engage in attributional processing about their relationships .
Second , women have been shown to be more responsive to other interpersonal cognitions such as expectancies for sexual experiences ( McNulty & Fisher , in press ) .
In fact , the greater responsiveness of women to their relationship cognitions may stem from their general tendency to process information more deeply ( e.g. , Tanaka , Panter , & Win- borne , 1988 ) , particularly information about their intimate rela- tionships ( e.g. , Acitelli , 1992 ) .
Future research may benefit by examining more directly whether the extent to which depth of processing affects relationship outcomes can account for gender differences in the extent to which men and women are differen- tially affected by their relationship cognitions .
Theoretical Implications Highlighting the limits of purely cognitive theories of relation- ship maintenance has implications for theories of and research on close relationships .
Over the past several decades , researchers have paid extensive attention to cognitive processes of relationship enhancement that tend to be associated with more satisfying inti- mate relationships ( e.g. , Fincham & Bradbury , 1987b , 1993 ; Kar- ney & Bradbury , 2000 ; Murray et al. , 1996a , 1996b ; Neff & Karney , 2003 ) .
An implicit assumption of much of this research has been that these findings identify strategies through which satisfying relationships can be maintained and distressed relation- ships can be improved , as indicated by attempts to incorporate cognitive treatments into traditional behavioral couple therapies ( e.g. , Baucom & Lester , 1986 ) .
The findings reported here support the first part of this assumption , revealing that benevolent cogni- tions can help maintain initial levels of satisfaction in relationships that are relatively healthy at the outset .
Nevertheless , the present findings question the second part of this assumption , revealing not only that more benevolent cognitions fail to help more distressed relationships but also that such cognitions run the risk of making such relationships worse .
Accordingly , in line with more contex- tual models of relationships ( e.g. , Bradbury & Fincham , 1991 ; Karney & Bradbury , 1995 ) , these findings join others ( e.g. , Mc- Nulty , in press ; McNulty & Karney , 2004 ) in integrating cognitive and behavioral approaches to relationship maintenance by demon- strating that the best strategies for protecting and improving rela- tionships depend on the specific circumstances of those relation- ships .
Consistent with cognitive approaches to relationship maintenance , couples experiencing more mild and infrequent prob- lems ( e.g. , occasional disagreements , a temporary change in the partner ’ s mood ) may benefit most from thinking benevolently about such problems , rather than addressing them directly through unnecessary but potentially painful efforts at repair .
But consistent with more behavioral approaches ( e.g. , Gottman & Krokoff , 1989 ; Heavey et al. , 1993 ) , coping with more serious challenges appears to require more than just positive thoughts .
Instead , partners ex- periencing more frequent or severe problems ( e.g. , persistent part- ner negligence , physical abuse ) may benefit most from acknowl- edging and addressing those problems actively , even if that means experiencing short-term pain and distress .
The present findings may also provide insight into the effects of benevolent cognitions on other sorts of outcomes .
For example , over the past several decades , social psychologists have debated the benefits of cognitions that enhance the self ( e.g. , Colvin & Block , 1994 ; Taylor & Brown , 1994 ) .
Whereas numerous studies demonstrate positive associations between self-enhancement and concurrent well-being ( for reviews , see Taylor & Brown , 1988 , 1994 ) , others have questioned whether any benefits of self- enhancement should endure over time ( e.g. , Colvin & Block , 1994 ; Colvin et al. , 1995 ; Crocker et al. , 1998 ; Paulhus , 1998 ; Robins & Beer , 2001 ) .
The present findings shed new light on this debate by suggesting that , like the long-term effects of relationship- enhancing cognitions , the long-term effects of self-enhancing cog- nitions may be moderated by the context in which they occur .
Specifically , consistent with Baumeister ’ s ( 1989 ) “ optimal mar- 643BENEVOLENT COGNITIONS IN MARRIAGE gin ” hypothesis , the present findings suggest that the long-term benefits of self-enhancement may be most likely to occur when people enhance themselves on dimensions that are already rela- tively positive to begin with , whereas the long-term costs of enhancing the self may be most likely to occur when people enhance themselves on dimensions that are more negative ( e.g. , underestimating a high risk for cancer ) .
In line with such reason- ing , Dillard et al .
( 2006 ) recently showed that smokers who were unrealistically optimistic about their chances of developing cancer , as compared with objective data regarding their actual risks , were less likely to plan to quit smoking over time than more accurate smokers .
Additionally , whereas disengaging the self from unim- portant weaknesses may prove beneficial , the present findings are in line with assertions by several theorists that disengaging the self from important domains ( e.g. , academics ) may be harmful over time by reducing necessary motivations in those domains ( e.g. , Crocker et al. , 1998 ; Major & Schmader , 1998 ; Steele et al. , 2002 ) .
Accordingly , future research on the adaptiveness of self- enhancement may benefit by examining the potential moderating role of the personal context in which such enhancement occurs .
Strengths and Limitations Our confidence in the results reported here is enhanced by a number of strengths of the methods and the design .
First , findings were replicated across two longitudinal studies , each of which spanned the first 4 years of marriage .
Furthermore , both studies assessed marital satisfaction at eight time points , and changes in those assessments were analyzed using growth curve analyses , providing more reliable and valid estimates of within-person change than traditional two-wave longitudinal designs ( Bryk & Raudenbush , 1987 ) .
Second , findings were replicated across sta- tistically independent measures of benevolent cognitions , multiple indicators of negativity , multiple measures of marital satisfaction , and multiple types of assessments ( observations and self-reports ) , and did not vary across two independent samples , suggesting that they were not idiosyncratic to particular measures , methods , or samples .
Third , whereas the average rate of retention in prior longitudinal research on marriage is 69 % ( Karney & Bradbury , 1995 ) , analyses in the present study were able to use data from 92 % ( Study 1 ) and 93 % ( Study 2 ) of the initial samples , reducing the likelihood that the results were affected by attrition bias .
Fourth , the rate of compliance with the nightly assessments of the diary aspect of the study also was quite high , with between 80 % and 93 % of the spouses in the samples returning multiple nightly evaluations of the marriage , further reducing the likelihood that our results were affected by attrition bias .
Despite these strengths , several factors nevertheless limit inter- pretations of the present findings .
First , the specific benevolent cognitions examined here were two out of the many cognitive strategies that have been studied in prior research .
Future research may benefit by examining whether other strategies ( e.g. , seeing the partner more positively than that partner sees him- or herself ; Murray et al. , 1996a ) demonstrate similar interactions with spe- cific features of the relationship over the long term .
Second , the global/specific covariance and negative behaviors were assessed only at Time 1 .
Though the ability of such measures to predict changes in satisfaction over several subsequent years of marriage is impressive , it is possible that other meaningful effects ( e.g. , more significant effects for husbands or the global/specific covari- ance ) could have been obtained with repeated assessments of these variables .
Third , because these data were obtained from relatively homogeneous samples of couples , generalizations to other samples should be made with caution .
For instance , people in the first few years of their marriages are especially prone to change .
Part of the reason for this change is that they encounter many new challenges in these early years ( Cherlin , 1992 ) .
If the effects of relationship enhancement are uniquely moderated by such challenges , then more established marriages may show less negative reactions to them .
Fourth , the couples examined in both studies were primarily White .
Although we are aware of no reasons to expect that the manner in which such thoughts affect relationships should differ across different races and ethnicities , other factors such as stress , education , and income that do covary with race and ethnicity may interact with the effects observed here .
Future research may benefit by examining the prevalence and effects of benevolent cognitions in other populations .
References Acitelli , L. K. ( 1992 ) .
Gender differences in the link between marital support and satisfaction in older couples .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 67 , 688–698 .
Aiken , L. S. , & West , S. G. ( 1991 ) .
Multiple regression : Testing and interpreting interactions .
Newbury Park , CA : Sage .
Amato , P. R. , & Previti , D. ( 2003 ) .
People ’ s reasons for divorcing : Gender , social class , the life course , and adjustment .
Journal of Family Issues , 24 , 602–626 .
Baucom , D. H. , & Lester , G. W. ( 1986 ) .
The usefulness of cognitive restructuring as an adjunct to behavioral marital therapy .
Behavior Therapy , 17 , 385–403 .
Baumeister , R. ( 1989 ) .
The optimal margin of illusions .
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology , 8 , 176–189 .
Bradbury , T. N. , & Fincham , F. D. ( 1990 ) .
Attributions in marriage : Review and critique .
Psychological Bulletin , 107 , 3–33 .
Bradbury , T. N. , & Fincham , F. D. ( 1991 ) .
A contextual model for advancing the study of marital interaction .
In G. J. O. Fletcher & F. D. Fincham ( Eds .
) , Cognition in close relationships ( pp .
127–147 ) .
Hills- dale , NJ : Erlbaum .
Bramlett , M. D. , & Mosher , W. D. ( 2002 ) .
Cohabitation , marriage , di- vorce , and remarriage in the United States ( Vital and Health Statistics No .
Series 23 , Number 22 ) .
Hyattsville , MD : National Center for Health Statistics .
Bryk , A. S. , & Raudenbush , S. W. ( 1987 ) .
Application of hierarchical linear models to assessing change .
Psychological Bulletin , 101 , 147– 158 .
Bryk , A. S. , & Raudenbush , S. W. ( 2002 ) .
Hierarchical linear models : Applications and data analysis methods ( 2nd ed . ) .
Newbury Park , CA : Sage .
Bryk , A. S. , Raudenbush , S. W. , & Congdon , R. T. ( 2004 ) .
HLM : Hier- archical linear modeling with the HLM/2L and HLM/3L programs .
Chicago : Scientific Software International .
Cherlin , A. J .
( 1992 ) .
Marriage , divorce , remarriage ( 2nd ed . ) .
Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press .
Christensen , A. , Atkins , D. C. , Yi , J. , Baucom , D. H. , & George , W. H. ( 2006 ) .
Couple and individual adjustment for 2 years following a ran- domized clinical trial comparing traditional versus integrative behavioral couple therapy .
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 74 , 1180–1191 .
Cohen , J. , & Cohen , P. ( 1983 ) .
Applied multiple regression : Correlational analysis for the behavioral sciences ( 2nd ed . ) .
Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum .
Colvin , C. R. , & Block , J .
( 1994 ) .
Do positive illusions foster mental 644 MCNULTY , O ’ MARA , AND KARNEY health ?
An examination of the Taylor and Brown formulation .
Psycho- logical Bulletin , 116 , 3–20 .
Colvin , C. R. , Block , J. , & Funder , D. C. ( 1995 ) .
Overly positive self- evaluations and personality : Negative implications for mental health .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 68 , 1152–1162 .
Cramer , D. ( 2003 ) .
A cautionary tale of two statistics : Partial correlation and standardized partial regression .
Journal of Psychology : Interdisci- plinary and Applied , 137 , 507–511 .
Crocker , J. , Major , B. , & Steele , C. ( 1998 ) .
Social stigma .
In D. T. Gilbert & S. T. Fiske ( Eds .
) , The handbook of social psychology ( Vol .
2 , 4th ed. , pp .
504–533 ) .
Boston : McGraw-Hill .
Dillard , A. J. , McCaul , K. D. , & Klein , W. M. P. ( 2006 ) .
Unrealistic optimism in smokers : Implications for smoking myth endorsement and self-protective motivation .
Journal of Health Communication , 11 , 93– 102 .
Doherty , W. J .
( 1982 ) .
Attributional style and negative problem solving in marriage .
Family Relations , 31 , 23–27 .
Eidelson , R. J. , & Epstein , N. ( 1982 ) .
Cognition and relationship malad- justment : Development of a measure of dysfunctional relationship be- liefs .
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 50 , 715–720 .
Epstein , N. , & Eidelson , R. J .
( 1981 ) .
Unrealistic beliefs of clinical cou- ples : Their relationship to expectations , goals , and satisfaction .
Ameri- can Journal of Family Therapy , 9 , 13–22 .
Filsinger , E. E. , & Thoma , S. J .
( 1988 ) .
Behavioral antecedents of rela- tionship stability and adjustment : A five-year longitudinal study .
Jour- nal of Marriage and the Family , 50 , 785–795 .
Fincham , F. D. , & Bradbury , T. N. ( 1987a ) .
The assessment of marital quality : A reevaluation .
Journal of Marriage and the Family , 49 , 797– 809 .
Fincham , F. D. , & Bradbury , T. N. ( 1987b ) .
The impact of attributions in marriage : A longitudinal analysis .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 , 510–517 .
Fincham , F. D. , & Bradbury , T. N. ( 1992 ) .
Assessing attributions in marriage : The relationship attribution measure .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 , 457–468 .
Fincham , F. D. , & Bradbury , T. N. ( 1993 ) .
Marital satisfaction , depression , and attributions : A longitudinal analysis .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 64 , 442–452 .
Fletcher , G. J. O. , & Thomas , G. ( 2000 ) .
Behavior and on-line cognition in marital interaction .
Personal Relationships , 7 , 111–130 .
Frye , N. E. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2002 ) .
Being better or getting better ?
Social and temporal comparisons as coping mechanisms in close relationships .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 28 , 1287–1299 .
Frye , N. E. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2004 ) .
Revision in memories of relationship development : Do biases persist over time ?
Personal Relationships , 11 , 79–97 .
Frye , N. E. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2006 ) .
The context of aggressive behavior in marriage : A longitudinal study of newlyweds .
Journal of Family Psy- chology , 20 , 12–20 .
Geiss , S. K. , & O ’ Leary , K. D. ( 1981 ) .
Therapist ratings of frequency and severity of marital problems : Implications for research .
Journal of Mar- ital and Family Therapy , 7 , 515–520 .
Gordon , K. C. , Burton , S. , & Porter , L. ( 2004 ) .
Predicting the intentions of women in domestic violence shelters to return to partners : Does forgive- ness play a role ?
Journal of Family Psychology , 18 , 331–338 .
Gottman , J. M. , & Krokoff , L. J .
( 1989 ) .
Marital interaction and satisfac- tion : A longitudinal view .
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol- ogy , 57 , 47–52 .
Heavey , C. L. , Layne , C. , & Christensen , A .
( 1993 ) .
Gender and conflict structure in marital interaction : A replication and extension .
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 61 , 16–27 .
Holtzworth-Munroe , A. , & Jacobson , N. S. ( 1985 ) .
Causal attributions of married couples : When do they search for causes ?
What do they con- clude when they do ?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 48 , 1398–1412 .
Huston , T. L. , & Vangelisti , A. L. ( 1991 ) .
Socioemotional behavior and satisfaction in marital relationships : A longitudinal study .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 , 721–733 .
Jacobson , N. S. , Christensen , A. , Prince , S. E. , Cordova , J. , & Eldridge , K. ( 2000 ) .
Integrative behavioral couple therapy : An acceptance-based , promising new treatment for couple discord .
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 68 , 351–355 .
Karney , B. R. , & Bradbury , T. N. ( 1995 ) .
The longitudinal course of marital quality and stability : A review of theory , method , and research .
Psychological Bulletin , 118 , 3–34 .
Karney , B. R. , & Bradbury , T. N. ( 1997 ) .
Neuroticism , marital interaction , and the trajectory of marital satisfaction .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 72 , 1075–1092 .
Karney , B. R. , & Bradbury , T. N. ( 2000 ) .
Attributions in marriage : State or trait ?
A growth curve analysis .
Journal of Personality and Social Psy- chology , 78 , 295–309 .
Karney , B. R. , & Coombs , R. H. ( 2000 ) .
Memory bias in long-term close relationships : Consistency or improvement .
Personality and Social Psy- chology Bulletin , 26 , 959–970 .
Karney , B. R. , & Frye , N. E. ( 2002 ) .
“ But we ’ ve been getting better lately ” : Comparing prospective and retrospective views of relationship develop- ment .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 82 , 222–238 .
Karney , B. R. , Garvan , C. W. , & Thomas , M. S. ( 2003 ) .
Family formation in Florida : 2003 baseline survey of attitudes , beliefs , and demographics relating to marriage and family formation .
Gainesville : University of Florida .
Karney , B. R. , McNulty , J. K. , & Bradbury , T. N. ( 2001 ) .
Cognition and the development of close relationships .
In G. J. O. Fletcher & M. S. Clark ( Eds .
) , Blackwell handbook in social psychology : Vol .
2 .
Inter- personal processes ( pp .
32–59 ) .
Oxford , England : Blackwell Publishers .
Karney , B. R. , McNulty , J. K. , & Frye , N. ( 2001 ) .
A social-cognitive perspective on the maintenance and deterioration of relationship satis- faction .
In J. H. Harvey & A. E. Wenzel ( Eds .
) , Close romantic rela- tionships ( pp .
195–214 ) .
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum .
Katz , J. , Arias , I. , Beach , S. R. H. , Brody , G. , & Roman , P. ( 1995 ) .
Excuses , excuses : Accounting for the effects of partner violence on marital satisfaction and stability .
Violence and Victims , 10 , 315–326 .
Krull , J. L. , & MacKinnon , D. P. ( 2001 ) .
Multilevel modeling of individ- uals and group level mediated effects .
Multivariate Behavioral Re- search , 36 , 249–277 .
Locke , H. J. , & Wallace , K. M. ( 1959 ) .
Short marital adjustment prediction tests : Their reliability and validity .
Marriage and Family Living , 21 , 251–255 .
Major , B. , & Schmader , T. ( 1998 ) .
Coping with stigma through psycho- logical disengagement .
In J. K. Swim & C. Stangor ( Eds .
) , Prejudice : The target ’ s perspective ( pp .
219–241 ) .
San Diego , CA : Academic Press .
McNulty , J. K. ( in press ) .
Forgiveness in marriage : Putting the benefits into context .
Journal of Family Psychology .
McNulty , J. K. , & Fisher , T. D. ( in press ) .
Gender differences in response to sexual expectancies and changes in sexual frequency : A short-term longitudinal study of sexual satisfaction in newly married couples .
Archives of Sexual Behavior .
McNulty , J. K. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2001 ) .
Attributions in marriage : Inte- grating specific and global evaluations of a relationship .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 27 , 943–955 .
McNulty , J. K. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2002 ) .
Expectancy confirmation in appraisals of marital interactions .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 28 , 764–775 .
McNulty , J. K. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2004 ) .
Positive expectations in the early years of marriage : Should couples expect the best or brace for the worst ?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 86 , 729–743 .
645BENEVOLENT COGNITIONS IN MARRIAGE Miller , P. J. E. , Niehuis , S. , & Huston , T. L. ( 2006 ) .
Positive illusions in marital relationships : A 13-year longitudinal study .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 32 , 1579–1594 .
Murray , S. L. , & Holmes , J. G. ( 1993 ) .
Seeing virtues in faults : Negativity and the transformation of interpersonal narratives in close relationships .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 , 707–722 .
Murray , S. L. , & Holmes , J. G. ( 1994 ) .
Storytelling in close relationships : The construction of confidence .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 20 , 650–663 .
Murray , S. L. , & Holmes , J. G. ( 1997 ) .
A leap of faith ?
Positive illusions in romantic relationships .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 23 , 586–604 .
Murray , S. L. , Holmes , J. G. , & Griffin , D. W. ( 1996a ) .
The benefits of positive illusions : Idealizations and the construction of satisfaction in close relationships .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 70 , 79–98 .
Murray , S. L. , Holmes , J. G. , & Griffin , D. W. ( 1996b ) .
The self-fulfilling nature of positive illusions in romantic relationships : Love is not blind , but prescient .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 71 , 1155– 1180 .
Neff , L. A. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2002 ) .
Person perception in close relation- ships : Specific accuracy but global enhancement .
Journal of Personality , 70 , 1077–1110 .
Neff , L. A. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2003 ) .
The dynamic structure of relationship perceptions : Differential importance as a strategy of relationship main- tenance .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 29 , 1433–1446 .
Neff , L. A. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2004 ) .
How does context affect intimate relationships ?
Linking external stress and cognitive processes within marriage .
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 30 , 134–148 .
Neff , L. A. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2005a ) .
Gender differences in social support : A question of skill or responsiveness ?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 88 , 79–90 .
Neff , L. A. , & Karney , B. R. ( 2005b ) .
To know you is to love you : The implications of global adoration and specific accuracy for marital rela- tionships .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 88 , 480–497 .
Norton , R. ( 1983 ) .
Measuring marital quality : A critical look at the depen- dent variable .
Journal of Marriage and the Family , 45 , 141–151 .
Osgood , C. E. , Suci , G. J. , & Tannenbaum , P. H. ( 1957 ) .
The measurement of meaning .
Urbana : University of Illinois Press .
Pape , K. , & Arias , I .
( 2000 ) .
The role of perceptions and attributions in battered women ’ s intentions to permanently end their violent relation- ships .
Cognitive Therapy and Research , 24 , 201–214 .
Paulhus , D. L. ( 1998 ) .
Interpersonal and intrapsychic adaptiveness of trait self-enhancement : A mixed blessing ?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 , 1197–1208 .
Raudenbush , S. W. , Brennan , R. T. , & Barnett , R. C. ( 1995 ) .
A multivar- iate hierarchical model for studying psychological change within mar- ried couples .
Journal of Family Psychology , 9 , 161–174 .
Roberts , J. K. , & Monaco , J. P. ( 2006 , April 9 ) .
Effect size measures for the two-level linear multilevel model .
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , San Francisco , CA .
Robins , R. W. , & Beer , J. S. ( 2001 ) .
Positive illusions about the self : Short-term benefits and long-term costs .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 80 , 340–352 .
Rosenthal , R. , & Rosnow , R. L. ( 2007 ) .
Essentials of behavioral research : Methods and data analysis ( 3rd ed . ) .
New York : McGraw-Hill .
Schumm , W. R. , Paff-Bergen , L. A. , Hatch , R. C. , Obiorah , F. C. , Cope- land , J. M. , Meens , L. D. , & Bugaighis , M. A .
( 1986 ) .
Concurrent and discriminant validity of the Kansas Marital Satisfaction Scale .
Journal of Marriage and the Family , 48 , 381–387 .
Sillars , A. L. , Coletti , S. F. , Parry , D. , & Rogers , M. A .
( 1982 ) .
Coding verbal conflict tactics : Nonverbal and perceptual correlates of the “ avoidance-distributive-integrative ” distinction .
Human Communication Research , 9 , 83–95 .
Snijders , T. , & Bosker , R. ( 1999 ) .
Multilevel analysis .
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .
Sobel , M. E. ( 1982 ) .
Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in structural equation models .
In S. Leinhardt ( Ed .
) , Sociological method- ology ( pp .
290–312 ) .
Washington , DC : American Sociological Associ- ation .
Steele , C. M. , Spencer , S. J. , & Aronson , J .
( 2002 ) .
Contending with group image : The psychology of stereotype and social identity threat .
In M. Zanna ( Ed .
) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( pp .
379– 440 ) .
San Diego , CA : Academic Press .
Swann , W. B. , Silvera , D. H. , & Proske , C. U .
( 1997 ) .
On “ knowing your partner ” : Dangerous illusions in the age of AIDS ?
Personal Relation- ships , 2 , 173–186 .
Tanaka , J. S. , Panter , A. T. , & Winborne , W. C. ( 1988 ) .
Dimensions of the need for cognition : Subscales and gender differences .
Multivariate Be- havioral Research , 23 , 35–50 .
Taylor , S. E. , & Brown , J. D. ( 1988 ) .
Illusion and well-being : A social psychological perspective on mental health .
Psychological Bulletin , 103 , 193–210 .
Taylor , S. E. , & Brown , J. D. ( 1994 ) .
Positive illusions and well-being revisited : Separating fact from fiction .
Psychological Bulletin , 116 , 21–27 .
Truman-Schram , D. M. , Cann , A. , Calhoun , L. , & Vanwallendael , L. ( 2000 ) .
Leaving an abusive dating relationship : An investment model comparison of women who stay versus women who leave .
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology , 19 , 161–183 .
Woody , E. Z. , & Costanzo , P. R. ( 1990 ) .
Does marital agony precede marital ecstasy ?
A comment on Gottman and Krokoff ’ s “ marital inter- action and satisfaction : A longitudinal view. ” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 58 , 499–501 .
Received April 19 , 2007 Revision received August 11 , 2007 Accepted August 23 , 2007 646 MCNULTY , O ’ MARA , AND KARNEY
