moeller2008.pdf
aZXzBupk2zidWsWpD880pNf.8w88-moeller2008.pdf.plain.html

Research Article Personality Dominance and Preferential Use of the Vertical Dimension of Space Evidence From Spatial Attention Paradigms Sara K. Moeller , Michael D. Robinson , and Darya L. Zabelina North Dakota State University ABSTRACT—Previous research has shown that dominant individuals frequently think in terms of dominance hier- archies , which typically invoke vertical metaphor ( e.g. , ‘ ‘ upper ’ ’ vs. ‘ ‘ lower ’ ’ class ) .
Accordingly , we predicted that in spatial attention paradigms , such individuals would systematically favor the vertical dimension of space more than individuals low in dominance .
This prediction was supported by two studies ( total N 5 96 ) , which provid- ed three tests involving two different spatial attention par- adigms .
In all cases , analyses controlling for speed of response to horizontal spatial probes revealed that more dominant individuals were faster than less dominant in- dividuals to respond to probes along the vertical dimension of space .
Such data support the metaphor-representation perspective , according to which people think in meta- phoric terms , even in on-line processing tasks .
These re- sults have implications for understanding dominance and also indicate that conceptual metaphor is relevant to un- derstanding the cognitive-processing basis of personality .
There is a striking tendency to represent dominance in vertical terms .
This tendency is apparent in linguistic metaphor ( Tolaas , 1991 ) , anthropological data ( Fiske , 1992 ) , sociological data ( Schwartz , 1981 ) , and scientific theories of personality domi- nance ( e.g. , Wiggins , 1996 ) .
The ubiquity of such mappings is consistent with the central postulate of the metaphor-repre- sentation perspective , according to which people must draw from the perceptual domain , as reflected in common metaphors , when attempting to represent abstract concepts such as domi- nance or power ( Gibbs , 1994 ; Lakoff & Johnson , 1999 ) .
The frequent pairing of dominance and verticality could be a feature of the English language that is independent of deeper concept-to-percept mappings ( see Gibbs , 1994 , for a review of this position ) .
Alternatively , this frequent pairing could be more fundamental ( Lakoff & Johnson , 1999 ) .
According to the lat- ter view , people think in perceptual terms , particularly when they are thinking about relatively abstract concepts , such as dominance or status ( Tolaas , 1991 ) .
A recent set of studies by Schubert ( 2005 ) supports the fundamental , nonlinguistic view of the pairing of dominance and verticality .
Specifically , he showed that incidental manipulations of verticality biased the speed with which participants could classify dominant stimuli ( i.e. , dominant stimuli were categorized faster when presented higher in visual space ) .
Other than Schubert ’ s ( 2005 ) study , however , few studies have examined the extent to which dominance and verticality are systematically linked in on-line processing .
One of the purposes of the studies reported here was to conduct such an examination .
In addition , we wanted to investigate whether the link between dominance and verticality extends to the domain of individual differences in dominance .
Testing this possibility is useful for two reasons .
First , researchers have often expressed uncertainty as to whether the metaphor-representation perspective can pro- vide insight concerning individual differences within a culture ( Kövecses , 2000 ) .
If it can not , this would constitute a significant limitation of this framework ( Lakoff , 1986 ) .
Second , support for the metaphor-representation perspective has routinely come from studies in which the conceptual features of stimuli— whether affect-related features ( e.g. , Meier , Robinson , Craw- ford , & Ahlvers , 2007 ) or dominance-related features ( Schubert , 2005 ) —have been manipulated .
Such stimulus manipulations Address correspondence to Sara Moeller , Psychology Department , North Dakota State University , Fargo , ND 58105 , e-mail : sara .
moeller @ ndsu.edu .
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE Volume 19—Number 4 355Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science might well ‘ ‘ prime ’ ’ the relevant metaphors ( e.g. , ‘ ‘ good is light ’ ’ : Meier et al. , 2007 ) , and it is unclear whether the links previously found would be observed in the absence of such concept-related manipulations .
By examining individuals who differ in their interpersonal dominance , one can examine links between dominance and verticality without manipulating stimulus dominance , and perhaps find additional support for the ‘ ‘ un- conditional ’ ’ ( Bargh , 1997 ) nature of such associations .
DOMINANCE AND VERTICALITY An important theory of social interaction ( Haslam , 1997 ) posits fourmodels of human relations : authority ranking , equalitymatch- ing , market pricing , and communal sharing .
What is unique about authority ranking , relative to the other three relational models , is its focus on vertical asymmetries in power .
There are also theories in communication ( Burgoon , Johnson , & Koch , 1998 ) , anthropology ( Fiske , 1992 ) , and sociology ( Schwartz , 1981 ) that refer to , and depict , interpersonal dominance in ex- plicitly vertical terms .
What is common to all of these theories , then , is the fact that they conceptualize dominance and power in terms of a vertical dimension of physical space .
If a vertical mode of conception is chronically accessible to dominant individuals , then they should be prone to perception along this vertical dimension as well .
The present studies are novel in examining this intriguing potential relationship .
Be- cause relatively dominant individuals have a tendency to con- ceptualize social relations in terms of verticality ( Fiske , 1992 ; Schwartz , 1981 ) , they should exhibit a perceptual favoritism for objects varying vertically in relation to a fixation point .
By contrast , because less dominant individuals are prone to con- ceptualizing social relations in terms other than verticality ( Fiske , 1992 ; Schwartz , 1981 ) , they should exhibit less percep- tual favoritism for objects with a vertical relation to the fixation point .
In sum , if we are correct that more dominant individuals more frequently invoke vertical metaphors to think about them- selves , other people , and their interactions with the world , then it should also be the case that such individuals are biased toward perceptual verticality , even in basic spatial attention tasks in which dominance is not systematically primed .
THE PRESENT RESEARCH We predicted that dominant individuals would exhibit biased attention along the vertical dimension of physical space .
To test this theory-driven prediction , we administered two spatial at- tention tasks .
In the first , participants were unable to predict the location of upcoming spatial probes .
We presented these probes in randomly selected locations—left , right , up , or down .
Thus , an association between dominance and facilitation of perception along the vertical dimension on this task would be due to rela- tively automatic perceptual processes .
The inclusion of the hor- izontal trials was not theoretically motivated , but rather allowed us to systematically control for individual differences in speed , which are quite pronounced on nearly any choice reaction time task ( Jensen , 1998 ; Robinson & Oishi , 2006 ) .
In our second study , we also administered a spatial attention task in which the location of the spatial probes was perfectly predictable because they alternated between an upper position and a lower position ( in vertical blocks ) or between a position on the left and a position on the right ( in horizontal blocks ) .
Because the probes ’ locations were perfectly predictable , any significant performance differences between individuals could not be due to variations in probe-location expectancies .
Thus , if individuals high in dominance were more skilled than individuals low in dominance at recognizing probes along the vertical dimension in the second task , we could conclude that this pattern was inde- pendent of possible individual differences in expectancies .
STUDY 1 Study 1 was an initial test of our hypothesis that more dominant individuals would be faster to respond to spatial targets along the vertical dimension of space .
We ensured that attention was cen- tered , both vertically and horizontally , at the start of each trial by presenting a centering prime that the participant was required to categorize .
Immediately after this categorization response , a spatial probe appeared in one of four randomly determined posi- tions on the screen—up , down , left , or right .
Because we used a centering prime ( akin to a fixation ) , along with a nearly instan- taneous presentation of the probe following the response to the prime , performance reflected covert orienting , according to the spatial attention literature ( Pashler , 1998 ; Posner , 1978 ) .
Method Participants Participants in Study 1 were 43 undergraduates ( 20 females , 23 males ) from North Dakota State University .
They received extra credit for their classes .
Personality Dominance and Preliminary Analyses We administered a 21-item personality-dominance scale from the International Personality Item Pool ( Goldberg et al. , 2006 ) .
This scale uses statements to assess personality dominance ( e.g. , ‘ ‘ impose my will on others , ’ ’ ‘ ‘ want to control the conversation ’ ’ ) .
Responses are made on a scale from 1 ( very inaccurate ) to 5 ( very accurate ) .
In our sample , internal reliability was good ( a5 .70 ) ; the mean and standard deviation were 3.06 and 0.42 , respec- tively .
The attention task was completed before the assessment of trait dominance to preclude the possibility that completing the trait scale first might influence performance in the implicit task ( Robinson & Neighbors , 2006 ) .
In no cases did participants ’ sex modify the findings reported here , all Fs < 1 , so we have collapsed across this variable .
Also , we note that analyses examining possible DominanceVertical 356 Volume 19—Number 4 Dominance and Use of the Vertical Dimension Location ( up vs. down ) and Dominance Horizontal Location ( left vs. right ) interactions yielded nonsignificant results ( ps > .10 ) .
We have therefore also collapsed across up and down loca- tions in quantifying vertical performance and across left and right locations in quantifying horizontal performance .
Spatial Attention Task The task was presented on a computer screen .
Participants were told that the spatial probe would always appear within a prom- inent , white-outlined box that was 11.75 in .
high by 11.75 in .
wide .
All spatial probes were presented half an inch from the relevant border of the box .
The task was simple : As quickly and accurately as possible , participants indicated whether the letter p or qwas presented , by pressing the corresponding key of the keyboard ( spatial atten- tion paradigms are typically this simple : Pashler , 1998 ) .
Correct responses were followed by a 200-ms blank interval , whereas incorrect responses were followed by the message ‘ ‘ Incorrect ! ’ ’ which was presented for 1,500 ms in order to encourage a high degree of accuracy .
To center fixation prior to the appearance of the spatial probes , and thereby ensure that every trial involved the same centered attentional focus , we included an initial task in which participants had to categorize a centrally presented stimulus as either a letter ( A , B , or C ) or a number ( 1 , 2 , or 3 ) .
Responses were made by pronouncing ‘ ‘ letter ’ ’ or ‘ ‘ number ’ ’ into a voice key .
When the oral response was registered , the central fixation stimulus disappeared and was immediately followed by a spatial probe ( i.e. , the letter p or q ) that appeared in one of the four locations , determined randomly .
Thus , the task assessed spontaneous favoring of one dimension over the other ( horizontal vs. vertical ) in covert-attention processes .
There were 200 trials , 100 with vertical probes and 100 with horizontal probes .
The vertical probes were horizontally centered on the screen and appeared above and below the central fixation point ; the hori- zontal probes were vertically centered on the screen and ap- peared left and right of the central fixation point .
In calculating latency scores , we followed general recom- mendations in the literature .
Specifically , we eliminated from consideration trials on which the response was incorrect ( mean accuracy5 94 % ) and log-transformed latencies to reduce skew ; outliers more than 2.5 standard deviations above and below the mean were replaced with these 2.5-SD cutoff values ( Robinson , 2007 ) .
Latencies on trials with vertical spatial probes were averaged to obtain vertical-dimension scores , whereas latencies on trials with horizontal spatial probes were averaged to obtain horizontal-dimension scores .
Results The horizontal probes did not differ from the vertical probes except in their location , and dominance did not predict speed to identify horizontal probes , r5 .04 , p5 .81 .
We could therefore use speed in responding to horizontal probes in order to control for irrelevant individual differences in speed .
Accordingly , we performed a simple regression in which log-transformed reaction time on trials with horizontal probes ( M5 789 ms ) was entered as a predictor of log-transformed reaction time on trials with vertical probes ( M 5 810 ms ) .
We then calculated a residual speed score in which the common variance was statis- tically removed from consideration .
Such residual scores were necessarily correlated with performance on trials with vertical probes , but necessarily uncorrelated with performance on trials with horizontal probes ( Robinson , 2007 ) .
We predicted that dominance would systematically correlate with residual verticality scores .
This proved to be the case , r 5 .42 , p < .01 .
Specifically , as predicted , higher levels of dominance were associated with lower scores ( i.e. , faster perfor- mance ) on trials with vertical spatial probes .
Figure 1 presents a scatter plot illustrating the relationship between residual verti- cality scores and personality dominance .
As the figure shows , individuals 2 standard deviations below the mean on the domi- nance scale were 30ms slower than one would expect on the basis of their speed in responding to horizontal spatial probes .
Con- versely , individuals 2 standard deviations above the mean on the dominance scale were 30 ms faster than one would expect given their response speed for horizontal spatial probes .
Thus , we obtained initial evidence that dominance is associated with biases favoring the vertical dimension in visual space .
Discussion We predicted that dominant individuals would exhibit greater facility with vertical spatial probes than with horizontal spatial probes .
To test this prediction , we administered a randomized- spatial-probe task and found that individuals high in dominance were faster to respond to vertical probes than could be predicted from their performance with horizontal spatial probes .
These results provide initial evidence that higher levels of personality –100 –80 –60 –40 –20 0 20 40 60 80 –3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3 Z-Scored Dominance V er tic al ity R es id ua l S co re s ( M ill is ec on ds ) Fig .
1 .
Scatter plot of the relation between personality dominance and residual verticality scores in Study 1 .
Volume 19—Number 4 357 Sara K. Moeller , Michael D. Robinson , and Darya L. Zabelina dominance are systematically related to enhanced attention to the vertical dimension , a pattern consistent with the metaphor- representation perspective that guided our predictions .
STUDY 2 The purpose of Study 2 was threefold .
First , we wanted to di- rectly replicate Study 1 , using the same paradigm .
Second , we sought to conceptually replicate the observed relation between dominance and attention to the vertical dimension in a spatial attention task using spatial probes that were perfectly predict- able .
Such a replication would indicate that the link between higher levels of personality dominance and facility with the vertical dimension of visual space is independent of expectan- cies for the location of randomly presented spatial stimuli .
Third , we wanted to conceptually replicate the results of Study 1 using a different measure of personality dominance .
Method Participants Participants were 53 undergraduates ( 29 females , 24 males ) from North Dakota State University .
They received extra credit for their classes .
Personality Dominance , Procedure , and Preliminary Analyses Personality dominance was assessed with the relevant dimen- sion from Wiggins ’ s ( 1979 ) circumplex measure .
Participants indicated the extent ( 1 5 extremely inaccurate , 6 5 extremely accurate ) to which 14 markers of high ( e.g. , ‘ ‘ dominant ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ forceful ’ ’ ) and low ( e.g. , ‘ ‘ meek ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ shy ’ ’ ) interpersonal domi- nance characterized them generally .
The low-dominance items were reverse-scored .
The scale proved to be highly reliable ( a5 .72 ; M 5 3.36 , SD 5 0.29 ) .
A pilot test indicated that the dominance measures used in Studies 1 and 2 are positively correlated to a high degree , though not so highly as to suggest isomorphism of the measures , r5 .66 , p < .01 .
Thus , conceptual replication with the new dominance measure seemed useful .
As in Study 1 , personality dominance was assessed last , after participants performed the spatial attention tasks .
We deemed it best to administer the random-location task from Study 1 before the new predictable-location task in order to preclude priming of location expectancies .
Spatial Attention Tasks The first spatial attention task was identical to the one used in Study 1 .
In the second task , the location of the spatial probe varied predictably .
As in the first task , participants were in- structed to be both quick and accurate , the spatial probes were the letters q and p , the probes appeared half an inch inside the relevant border of the prominently displayed box ( either left , right , up , or down ) , and there were 200 trials ( 100 with vertical probes and 100 with horizontal probes ) .
The method for scoring speed of response to spatial probes was similar to that used in Study 1 ( mean accuracy 5 .95 and .96 in the random- and predictable-location tasks , respectively ) .
The second task differed from the first , however , in that probe locations were blocked , such that all probes within a block were located along the same dimension , either vertical or horizontal .
Each of the 10 blocks contained 20 trials , and block order was randomly determined for each participant .
Furthermore , the probe locations alternated between up and down in vertical blocks and between left and right in horizontal blocks .
And as in Study 1 , the vertical probes were horizontally centered on the screen , and the horizontal probes were vertically centered on the screen .
Thus , the location of probes in the second task was per- fectly predictable , which equated location expectancies across participants .
Because the location of the probes was entirely predictable , we viewed the second task as assessing individual differences in the ability to attend to and shift attention along the vertical dimension ( relative to the horizontal dimension ) .
Results In neither task was there a correlation between dominance and performance on trials with horizontal probes , r5 .08 , p5 .60 , for the random-location task and r5 .07 , p5 .64 , for the predictable- location task .
Thus , in both tasks , we could use performance on trials with horizontal probes to control for general speed factors of no interest in this study .
Accordingly , for each task , we performed a simple regression in which performance on trials with horizontal probes ( Ms5 861ms and623ms for the random- and predictable- location tasks , respectively ) was entered as a predictor of perfor- mance on trials with vertical probes ( Ms5 893 ms and 637ms for the random- and predictable-location tasks , respectively ) .
The results of the simple regressions were used to create two residual vertical-attention scores , one for each task , that were uncorrelated with speed in responding to horizontal spatial probes .
We then correlated interpersonal dominance with the residual verticality scores for each task considered separately .
Both correlations were significant , r5.28 , p < .05 , for the random- location task and r5.31 , p < .05 , for the predictable-location task .
As in Study 1 , the direction of these correlations indicates that higher levels of dominance were associated with lower residual scores ( i.e. , faster performance ) .
Figure 2 presents scatter plots showing the relations between personality domi- nance and residual vertical-attention scores on the two tasks .
As the figure shows , individuals 2 standard deviations below the mean for dominance were slower than one would expect given their performance on trials with horizontal probes ( by approximately 30 ms in the random-location task and by ap- proximately 15ms in the predictable-location task ) .
By contrast , individuals 2 standard deviations above themean for dominance were faster than one would expect given their speed in re- sponding to horizontal probes .
These are rather pronounced 358 Volume 19—Number 4 Dominance and Use of the Vertical Dimension spatial attention biases relative to those generally reported in the literature ( Klein , 2000 ) .
Discussion Study 2 replicated the systematic relation between personality dominance and biases favoring vertical , relative to horizontal , spatial locations in a paradigm in which the location of spatial probes varied randomly .
Study 2 also extended the results of Study 1 by showing that dominance predicts speed of responding to vertical spatial probes even when the location of the probes is perfectly predictable .
The latter result suggests that individuals high in dominance not only favor vertical locations more than other individuals , but also are more capable of shifting attention vertically when expectancies for probe location are held constant across individuals .
Finally , Study2 replicated the relation between personality dominance and attention to the vertical dimension of space using a second measure of personality dominance , one that follows from a longer research tradition than our first measure and is related to circumplex models of individual differences in in- terpersonal functioning ( Wiggins , 1979 ) .
GENERAL DISCUSSION Both embodied theories of social cognition ( for a review , see Niedenthal , Barsalou , Winkielman , Krauth-Gruber , & Ric , 2005 ) and the metaphor-representation perspective ( Gibbs , 1994 ; Lakoff & Johnson , 1999 ) have generally focused on nor- mative effects , rather than those related to personality variables .
However , we have suggested that the latter perspective can offer important process-oriented insights into personality functioning ( Meier & Robinson , 2005 ) .
The present results provide novel evidence along these lines .
Simply stated , more dominant individuals think in domi- nance-related terms to a greater extent than do less dominant individuals ( e.g. , Moskowitz & Zuroff , 2005 ; Wiggins , 1996 ) .
That is , their thoughts more often involve power , powerlessness , and relative dominance ( Keltner , Gruenfeld , & Anderson , 2003 ) .
Because there is an intimate link between dominance-related rep- resentational processes and vertical perceptual metaphor ( Lakoff & Johnson , 1999 ; Schwartz , 1981 ; Tolaas , 1991 ) , we predicted a general bias in which high dominance would be associated with facilitated processing along the vertical dimension of space rela- tive to the horizontal dimension of space .
This prediction was systematically confirmed in two studies , using two spatial attention tasks and two measures of personality dominance .
Implications and Future Research Our results are important in a number of ways .
First , it appears that personality-related dominance , in addition to stimulus- related dominance ( e.g. , Schubert , 2005 ) , can be usefully under- stood in terms of vertical metaphoric processes .
The importance of this process-oriented framework is highlighted by the fact that the literature on personality-related dominance has primarily focused on measuring this trait , rather than understanding how it functions in interactions with the world ( for a review , seeWiggins , 1996 ) .
Thus , it has been stated that researchers ’ social-cognitive understanding of the correlates of personality dominance is per- haps underspecified and that more research of the type we have reported here is important to understanding the cognitive pro- cesses associated with individual differences in trait dominance ( Moskowitz , 2004 ; Moskowitz & Zuroff , 2005 ) .
Second , our results are important because they are among the first to link personality differences to metaphor-consistent rep- resentational biases .
Such findings suggest that embodiment frameworks in general , and metaphor-representation frame- works in particular , can be profitably extended to understanding the processing basis of personality traits , hitherto a largely un- derresearched area in the literature on embodied cognition ( Lakoff , 1986 ; Meier & Robinson , 2005 ) .
Third , our findings are important because they suggest that metaphoric biases need not involve stimulus factors suggestive of metaphor , such as stimulus affect ( Meier & Robinson , 2004 ) or stimulus dominance ( Schubert , 2005 ) .
Rather , our results –150 –100 –50 0 50 100 150 0 1 2 3 Z-Scored Dominance –60 –40 –20 0 20 40 60 –3 –2 –1 –3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3 Z-Scored Dominance V er tic al ity R es id ua l S co re s ( M ill is ec on ds ) V er tic al ity R es id ua l S co re s ( M ill is ec on ds ) Fig .
2 .
Scatter plots of the relation between personality dominance and residual verticality scores in the random-location ( top panel ) and pre- dictable-location ( bottom panel ) tasks in Study 2 .
Volume 19—Number 4 359 Sara K. Moeller , Michael D. Robinson , and Darya L. Zabelina suggest that more general metaphoric biases may be observed , even in tasks in which the stimuli convey no social meaning .
In connection with this point , we emphasize the benefits of an individual differences approach , which can uncover metaphoric biases in the absence of manipulations of conceptual informa- tion .
Findings such as these will be useful to social-personality perspectives emphasizing the unconditional nature of automatic processing ( Bargh , 1997 ) .
Extending this general personality-related perspective to additional metaphoric biases will also be quite useful .
For example , negative evaluations bias perceptions of font color in a ‘ ‘ darker ’ ’ direction ( Meier et al. , 2007 ) .
From these findings , it seems likely to us that a personal tendency toward negative affect , too , might bias perceptual processes in a dark direction , but such results have not been reported to date .
The individual differences approach constitutes uncharted territory in theories of metaphor and comprehension ( Lakoff , 1986 ) , and we believe that this approach might also reveal important new insights concerning the processing basis of personality ( Meier & Robin- son , 2005 ) .
A considerable body of research links high levels of trait anxiety to spatial attention biases favoring threatening stimuli ( for a review , see MacLeod , 1999 ) .
These findings have been interpreted to suggest that anxious individuals , at some level , want to attend to threatening stimuli because they are viewed as goal relevant ( Fox , Russo , Bowles , & Dutton , 2001 ; Matthews & Wells , 2000 ) .
Our data support this top-down perspective on spatial attention ( Pashler , 1998 ) and suggest the need for greater consideration of personality-linked effects on top-down spatial attention processes .
Conclusions Ametaphor-related theory led us to predict that individuals high in dominance would favor vertical locations in visual space .
Two studies involving three replications support this prediction .
Our findings significantly extend the metaphor-representation frame- work to personality variables and to cognitive tasks that seem , on the surface , to possess few implications for representational mean- ing .
On the basis of these results , we suggest that the metaphor- representation perspective may offer important insights concern- ing personality traits , even in the case of very mundane cognitive tasks .
REFERENCES Bargh , J.A .
( 1997 ) .
The automaticity of everyday life .
In R.S .
Wyer ( Ed .
) , The automaticity of everyday life ( pp .
1–61 ) .
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum .
Burgoon , J.K. , Johnson , M.L. , & Koch , P.T .
( 1998 ) .
The nature and measurement of interpersonal dominance .
Communication Mono- graphs , 65 , 308–335 .
Fiske , A.P .
( 1992 ) .
The four elementary forms of sociality : Framework for a unified theory of social relations .
Psychological Review , 99 , 689–723 .
Fox , E. , Russo , R. , Bowles , R. , & Dutton , K. ( 2001 ) .
Do threatening stimuli draw or hold visual attention in subclinical anxiety ?
Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 130 , 681–700 .
Gibbs , R.W .
( 1994 ) .
The poetics of mind : Figurative thought , language , and understanding .
Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press .
Goldberg , L.R. , Johnson , J.A. , Eber , H.W. , Hogan , R. , Ashton , M.C. , Cloninger , C.R. , & Gough , H.G .
( 2006 ) .
The International Per- sonality Item Pool and the future of public-domain personality measures .
Journal of Research in Personality , 40 , 84–96 .
Haslam , N. ( 1997 ) .
Four grammars for primate social relations .
In J.A .
Simpson & D.T .
Kenrick ( Eds .
) , Evolutionary social psychology ( pp .
297–316 ) .
Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum .
Jensen , A.R .
( 1998 ) .
The g factor : The science of mental ability .
Westport , CT : Praeger .
Keltner , D. , Gruenfeld , D.H. , & Anderson , C. ( 2003 ) .
Power , approach , and inhibition .
Psychological Review , 110 , 265–284 .
Klein , R.M .
( 2000 ) .
Inhibition of return .
Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 4 , 138–147 .
Kövecses , Z .
( 2000 ) .
Metaphor and emotion : Language , culture , and body in human feeling .
Cambridge , England : Cambridge Univer- sity Press .
Lakoff , G. ( 1986 ) .
A figure of thought.Metaphor and Symbolic Activity , 1 , 215–225 .
Lakoff , G. , & Johnson , M. ( 1999 ) .
Philosophy in the flesh : The embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought .
New York : Basic Books .
MacLeod , C. ( 1999 ) .
Anxiety and anxiety disorders .
In T. Dalgleish & M.J. Power ( Eds .
) , Handbook of cognition and emotion ( pp .
447–477 ) .
New York : John Wiley & Sons .
Matthews , G. , & Wells , A .
( 2000 ) .
Attention , automaticity , and affec- tive disorder .
Behavior Modification , 24 , 69–93 .
Meier , B.P. , & Robinson , M.D .
( 2004 ) .
Why the sunny side is up : Associations between affect and vertical position .
Psychological Science , 15 , 243–247 .
Meier , B.P. , & Robinson , M.D .
( 2005 ) .
The metaphorical representa- tion of affect .
Metaphor and Symbol , 20 , 239–257 .
Meier , B.P. , Robinson , M.D. , Crawford , L.E. , & Ahlvers , W.J .
( 2007 ) .
When ‘ light ’ and ‘ dark ’ thoughts become light and dark responses : Affect biases brightness judgments .
Emotion , 7 , 366–376 .
Moskowitz , D.S .
( 2004 ) .
Does elevated power lead to approach and reduced power lead to inhibition ?
Comment on Keltner , Gruenfeld , and Anderson ( 2003 ) .
Psychological Review , 111 , 808–811 .
Moskowitz , D.S. , & Zuroff , D.C. ( 2005 ) .
Assessing interpersonal per- ceptions using the interpersonal grid .
Psychological Assessment , 17 , 218–230 .
Niedenthal , P.M. , Barsalou , L.W. , Winkielman , P. , Krauth-Gruber , S. , & Ric , F. ( 2005 ) .
Embodiment in attitudes , social perception , and emotion .
Personality and Social Psychology Review , 9 , 184– 211 .
Pashler , H. ( 1998 ) .
The psychology of attention .
Cambridge , MA : MIT Press .
Posner , M.I .
( 1978 ) .
Chronometric explorations of mind .
Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum .
Robinson , M.D .
( 2007 ) .
Lives lived in milliseconds : Using cognitive methods in personality research .
In R.W .
Robins , R.C .
Fraley , & R. Krueger ( Eds .
) , Handbook of research methods in personality psychology ( pp .
345–359 ) .
New York : Guilford Press .
360 Volume 19—Number 4 Dominance and Use of the Vertical Dimension Robinson , M.D. , & Neighbors , C. ( 2006 ) .
Catching the mind in action : Implicit methods in personality research and assessment .
In M. Eid & E. Diener ( Eds .
) , Handbook of multimethod measurement in psychology ( pp .
115–125 ) .
Washington , DC : American Psycho- logical Association Press .
Robinson , M.D. , & Oishi , S. ( 2006 ) .
Trait self-report as a ‘ ‘ fill in ’ ’ belief system : Categorization speed moderates the extraversion/life satisfaction relation .
Self and Identity , 5 , 15–34 .
Schubert , T.W .
( 2005 ) .
Your highness : Vertical positions as perceptual symbols of power .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 89 , 1–21 .
Schwartz , B .
( 1981 ) .
Vertical classification : A study in structuralism and the sociology of knowledge .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press .
Tolaas , J .
( 1991 ) .
Notes on the origin of some spatialization metaphors .
Metaphor and Symbolic Activity , 6 , 203–218 .
Wiggins , J.S .
( 1979 ) .
A psychological taxonomy of trait-descriptive terms : The interpersonal domain .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 , 395–412 .
Wiggins , J.S .
( 1996 ) .
An informal history of the interpersonal circumplex tradition .
Journal of Personality Assessment , 66 , 217– 233 .
( RECEIVED 7/3/07 ; REVISION ACCEPTED 9/19/07 ) Volume 19—Number 4 361 Sara K. Moeller , Michael D. Robinson , and Darya L. Zabelina
