tabossi2008.pdf
a8SLztlfHWw_KOXoWZVCAwRzv4De-tabossi2008.pdf.plain.html

Processing Idiomatic Expressions : Effects of Semantic Compositionality Patrizia Tabossi , Rachele Fanari , and Kinou Wolf University of Trieste Three experiments tested the main claims of the idiom decomposition hypothesis : People have clear intuitions on the semantic compositionality of idiomatic expressions , which determines the syntactic behavior of these expressions and how they are recognized .
Experiment 1 showed that intuitions are clear only for a very restricted number of expressions , but for the majority of idioms , they are not consistent across speakers .
Experiment 2 failed to support the claim that semantic compositionality influences the syntactic flexibility of idioms .
Finally , Experiment 3 showed that idioms are more quickly recognized than their literal counterparts , regardless of compositionality and syntactic flexibility .
All of the findings were at odds with the tenets of the idiom decomposition hypothesis .
The theoretical implications of the results with respect to idiom processing and the notion of compositionality are discussed .
Keywords : idiom , recognition , compositionality , fixed expressions Idiomatic expressions such as kick the bucket and break the ice are very common , particularly in colloquial language , and are used by speakers with no apparent difficulty .
In the large family of conventional or fixed expressions , they are characterized by the fact that their figurative meaning is not a direct function of the meanings of their parts ( Jackendoff , 1995 ) .
For example , the meanings of the words kick , the , and bucket , composed according to the syntactic relations among them , do not produce the meaning “ die suddenly. ” Moreover , although there is large variability , idi- omatic expressions can occur only in a limited number of syntactic constructions .
Most English speakers agree , for instance , that a sentence such as The bucket was kicked by the man no longer retains its figurative interpretation .
These characteristics pose challenging problems to those inter- ested in language .
Of particular interest among linguists is the seemingly idiosyncratic syntactic behavior of these expressions .
Over 25 years ago , in contrast with the view prevailing at the time , Nunberg ( 1978 ) proposed that several intriguing grammatical phe- nomena shown by idiomatic expressions may be accounted for on the basis of their semantic properties .
He introduced the notion of idioms as combining expressions and argued that the more decom- posable an idiom is , the more likely it is to be syntactically flexible .
Compositionality refers to the fact that the constituents of some idioms “ carry identifiable parts of the idiomatic meaning ” ( Nunberg , Sag , & Wasow , 1994 , p. 496 ) .
In pop the question , for example , there is a clear correspondence between pop and question and the relevant parts of the figurative meaning “ propose mar- riage. ” Compositionality was introduced in psycholinguistics by Gibbs and colleagues ( Gibbs & Nayak , 1989 ; Gibbs , Nayak , Bolton , & Keppel , 1989 ) , who , on the basis of this notion , developed the so-called idiom decomposition hypothesis .
According to this view , idioms are at least partly decomposable , and speakers have shared intuitions about how the meanings of the parts contribute to the idiomatic meaning .
These intuitions determine the syntactic be- havior of the idioms : The more an idiom is seen as analyzable , the more likely that idiom will be treated as syntactically flexible ( Gibbs & Nayak , 1989 ) .
Moreover , idiom processing is based on compositionality : Semantically decomposable expressions may be analyzed compositionally .
Each component is retrieved from the mental lexicon and combined with the other components of the string according to their syntactic relations .
In contrast , the mean- ing of nondecomposable idioms is retrieved directly from the lexicon .
Thus , the comprehension of decomposable and nonde- composable idioms is achieved through different processes : De- composable idioms involve the same mechanisms of lexical re- trieval and syntactic parsing that take place during the comprehension of literal expressions , whereas nondecomposable idioms require processes akin to those operating in the recognition of individual words ( Gibbs , Nayak , Bolton , & Keppel , 1989 ) .
Over the years , semantic analyzability has become very popular among psycholinguists , and the claims of the idiom decomposition hypothesis are now widely accepted ( Glucksberg , 2001 ; Titone & Connine , 1999 ) .
Yet , the empirical evidence in support of these claims is surprisingly scarce and contradictory .
For example , Gibbs and his colleagues found that decomposable idioms are more flexible and are processed more quickly than are nondecom- posable and less flexible idioms ( Gibbs & Nayak , 1989 ; Gibbs , Nayak , & Cutting , 1989 ) .
However , Swinney and Cutler ( 1979 ) failed to find any time difference in the processing of flexible and nonflexible idioms .
Additionally , Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ) found that participants were faster at deciding that a string was meaningful Patrizia Tabossi , Rachele Fanari , and Kinou Wolf , Department of Psy- chology , University of Trieste , Trieste , Italy .
Rachele Fanari is now at the Facoltà di Scienze della Formazione , Università di Cagliari , Italy , and Kinou Wolf is now at the Department of Mental Health of Trieste , Trieste , Italy .
The research was supported by PRIN and by the Research Project of the Direzione Regionale dell ’ Istruzione e della Cultura della Regione Au- tonoma Friuli Venezia Giulia .
We thank Corrado Cavallero and Giuseppe Longobardi for their valuable suggestions .
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Patrizia Tabossi , Dipartimento di Psicologia , Università di Trieste , Via S. Anasta- sio 12 , 34134 , Trieste , Italy .
E-mail : tabossi @ units.it Journal of Experimental Psychology : Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association Learning , Memory , and Cognition 2008 , Vol .
34 , No .
2 , 313–327 0278-7393/08/ $ 12.00 DOI : 10.1037/0278-7393.34.2.313 313 when it was a decomposable idiom rather than a literal control , but they were slower when the string was a nondecomposable idiom .
In a similar vein , Titone and Connine ( 1999 ) conducted an eye tracking study , in which participants read idiomatic sentences containing verbal idioms that were decomposable or nondecom- posable .
Sentential contexts biased the figurative or the literal interpretation of the strings and either preceded or followed the idiomatic expressions .
The results showed that nondecomposable idioms were read more slowly when context ( with either a figu- rative or a literal bias ) preceded the idiom than when it followed it .
No such difference was found for decomposable idioms .
Titone and Connine interpreted the findings as consistent with the idiom decomposition hypothesis : Whenever an idiom is encountered , the literal and the figurative interpretations are always computed and activated .
The two interpretations are distinct for nondecompos- able idioms , and the integration of the contextually appropriate interpretation is more difficult than with decomposable idioms , in which the figurative and the literal interpretations are semantically related .
However , using the same procedure as Gibbs and colleagues , Titone and Connine ( 1994 ) failed to find reliable consistency in participants ’ intuitions on semantic analyzability .
In a similar vein , although from a production perspective , Cutting and Bock ( 1997 ) explored whether decomposable idioms may give rise to the pro- duction of more idiom blends than nondecomposable idioms but failed to find any effect : No difference in the error rates between the two types of expressions was observed .
The authors concluded that idioms have identical lexical representations when they enter the production process .
The goal of the present study was to assess the empirical adequacy of the main claims of the idiom decomposition hypoth- esis : Speakers have clear intuitions on idiom compositionality ( Experiment 1 ) , and compositionality determines flexibility ( Ex- periment 2 ) as well as speed of recognition ( Experiment 3 ) .
We undertook this study with the hope that the results would improve our comprehension of idiom recognition and help to clarify the role of compositionality in the processing of idiomatic expressions .
Experiment 1 In addition to the distinction between semantically decompos- able and nondecomposable idioms , Nunberg ( 1978 ) proposed a further categorization of decomposable idioms into normally and abnormally decomposable .
The distinction was motivated by the observation that some decomposable idioms appear to be less syntactically flexible than one would expect .
Spill the beans , for example , is decomposable , as it is intuitively clear how its indi- vidual words contribute to the meaning “ reveal a secret. ” Never- theless , when presented in the passive form ( e.g. , “ The beans were spilled by the girl ” ) , the expression sounds rather odd in its figurative interpretation to most English speakers .
According to Nunberg ( 1978 ) , what makes idioms such as spill the beans dif- ferent from normally decomposable idioms is that the literal and figurative meanings of their constituents have a metaphorical relation .
In a string like pop the question , for example , question refers to a specific type of question , namely , a marriage proposal .
Hence , pop the question is a normally decomposable , syntactically flexible idiom .
In contrast , beans must be interpreted as a meta- phor for “ secret ” and , hence , spill the beans is decomposable , but abnormally so , and is less syntactically flexible than normally decomposable expressions .
Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) investigated people ’ s ability to cate- gorize idioms into the three categories proposed by Nunberg ( 1978 ) and showed that the distinction between normally decom- posable , abnormally decomposable , and nondecomposable idioms corresponds to people ’ s intuitions about the semantics of the idiomatic expressions of their language .
In fact , the decomposition ratings given by participants in Gibbs and Nayak ’ s study were highly consistent , and their proportion of agreement—86 % for normally decomposable idioms , 79 % for abnormally decompos- able idioms , and 88 % for nondecomposable idioms—was statisti- cally above chance for all three groups of idioms .
Yet , the distinctions between decomposable and nondecompos- able idioms , and between normally and abnormally decomposable idioms , are less easy to capture than one might expect in light of Gibbs and Nayak ’ s ( 1989 ) results .
For example , it is not difficult to agree that break the ice is decomposable , whereas kick the bucket is nondecomposable .
But consider hold your tongue and shoot the breeze .
How strongly does the reader agree with the intuitions of Cutting and Bock ’ s judges ( 1997 ) , who rated the former as decomposable like break the ice and the latter as non- decomposable like kick the bucket ?
Similarly , Gibbs and Nayak ’ s participants ( 1989 ) judged miss the boat ( “ lose opportunity ” ) as normally decomposable and get down to brass tacks ( “ get to the problem ” ) as abnormally decomposable .
But in what sense is the relation between boat and “ opportunity ” less metaphorical than the relation between brass tacks and “ the problem ” ?
These examples suggest that the ease with which people can judge semantic analyzability varies greatly : For a few expressions , intuitions are subjectively clear and consistent across speakers , whereas often they are confused and inconsistent .
Unfortunately , in the study conducted by Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) , the authors preselected the expressions on the basis of their intuitions , prob- ably choosing a set of materials that , while capturing consistent judgments , may not be representative of idioms in general .
Ac- cordingly , the main goal of our Experiment 1 was to test whether the consistency of people ’ s intuitions about semantic analyzability holds for the generality of idioms .
The experiment , which we conducted with the same procedures as used in Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) , was divided into two phases .
In the first phase , a group of participants received a list of idiom- atic sentences , each paired with a literal paraphrase ( e.g. , gettare la spugna / throw the sponge,1 paraphrased as “ surrender ” ) .
Partici- pants ’ task was to indicate , on a 7-point scale , to what extent the components of each idiom singularly contributed to the figurative meaning of the expression as expressed in the paraphrase .
In the second phase of the experiment , idioms previously judged as decomposable were presented to a new group of participants , who were requested to categorize the expressions into normally or abnormally decomposable .
Method Participants .
A total of 47 undergraduates at the University of Trieste , Trieste , Italy volunteered to participate in the experiment : 1 It should be noted that the translations of the Italian idioms are literal .
314 TABOSSI , FANARI , AND WOLF 18 participated in the first phase of the experiment , and 29 took part in the second phase .
All were native speakers of Italian and were unaware of the purposes of the study .
Materials .
A total of 80 verbal idioms in which the verb was followed by a noun phrase or a prepositional phrase were selected from the Dizionario dei Modi di Dire Della Lingua Italiana [ Dictionary of Ways to Say the Italian Language ] ( Quartu , 2000 ) .
We chose idioms that we believed to be familiar and literal , that is , those with a literal interpretation , as is the case in the majority of the idioms in Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) .
Intuitions on literality were tested by asking 10 judges , all native speakers of Italian , to decide for each expression whether it might have a plausible meaning other than the figurative one .
There was 100 % agreement among the judges that the 80 idioms had a literal interpretation .
Knowledge and familiarity were established by a new panel of 10 judges .
Each judge was first requested to orally explain the meaning of each of the idioms , providing a paraphrase .
Next , he or she was asked to decide how familiar the expression was , in his or her view , on a 7-point scale , ranging from 1 ( not at all familiar ) to 7 ( very familiar ) .
The mean familiarity rating for the 80 expres- sions was 5.86 ( SD 0.21 ) .
Each of the selected idioms was paired with a paraphrase of its figurative meaning taken from Quartu ( 2000 ) .
A list containing all of the expressions and their paraphrases was constructed ( Appen- dix A ) .
Procedure .
The 18 participants in the first phase of the study were presented with a booklet containing written instructions along with the list of idiom–paraphrase pairs in a random order .
The instructions were the same as in Gibbs and Nayak ’ s ( 1989 ) Experiment 2 : In the following pages you will find a list of sentences containing idiomatic expressions , each paired with its paraphrase .
Your task is to read each idiomatic–paraphrase sentence pair and to judge for each idiomatic expression to what extent its components singularly con- tribute to the figurative meaning of the expression as expressed in the paraphrase .
To express the judgment , you will have to use a 7-point scale like that shown below : Please give the scores keeping in mind that 1 indicates that the two sentences in a pair are not at all similar in meaning , and 7 indicates that they are very similar in meaning .
Intermediate scores are for intermediate degrees of similarity .
Please do not forget to judge all the pairs and assign to each of them a single score .
Two examples were provided , and the mean score for each idiom was computed .
Idioms were further divided into decompos- able and nondecomposable groups .
Idioms whose mean ratings were higher than 4.00 were considered decomposable , whereas idioms whose mean ratings were lower than 4.00 were considered nondecomposable .
( No idiom had a score equal to 4.00 . )
In the second phase , decomposable expressions were presented to 29 new participants .
These participants received a booklet containing the expressions along with their paraphrases .
The list was preceded by the following written instructions : Many idioms are decomposable , i.e. , they have words whose mean- ings directly relate to their figurative interpretations .
For example , giocare col fuoco / play with the fire means “ do something danger- ous. ” This idiom is decomposable because there is an intuitive relation between giocare / play and “ do ” and between il fuoco / the fire and “ a dangerous thing. ” Similarly , prendere il toro per le corna / take the bull by the horns means “ tackle a problem directly. ” This idiom is also decomposable because there is an intuitive relation between prendere / take and “ tackle , ” toro / bull and “ problem , ” per le corna / by the horns and “ directly. ” However , decomposable idioms differ from one another .
In some of them , the relation between the words and their figurative meanings is rather literal .
For example , in giocare col fuoco , giocare has a literal relation with “ do ” and fuoco refers to a particular kind of dangerous things .
Expressions of this sort are normally decomposable .
On the other hand , there are idioms in which the words have a more metaphorical relation to their figurative ref- erents .
Thus , in prendere il toro per le corna , toro and per le corna refer to “ problem ” and “ directly ” in a metaphorical way .
These idioms are abnormally decomposable .
Your task is to decide for each of the following idioms whether it is normally or abnormally decomposable .
The proportion of participants categorizing idioms as normally or abnormally decomposable was calculated .
Results and Discussion The mean compositionality ratings for all of the expressions was 3.86 ( SD 0.90 ) : A total of 43 expressions had a mean rating above 4.00 and , hence , were categorized as decomposable , whereas the remaining expressions were categorized as nondecom- posable .
Their mean ratings were 4.58 ( SD 0.46 ) and 3.13 ( SD 0.58 ) , respectively .
The proportion of agreement among judges in the categorization of decomposable and nondecomposable idioms was 62.21 % and 59.98 % .
According to the binomial test ( with a null hypothesis probability of .50 ) , these proportions were not different from chance : decomposable : p .13 ; nondecomposable : p .25 .
Of the 43 decomposable idioms , 26 were categorized as nor- mally decomposable , and 17 were categorized as abnormally de- composable .
The proportion of agreement among judges was 66.15 % for the normally decomposable idioms and 60.00 % for the abnormally decomposable idioms .
According to the binomial test ( with a null hypothesis probability of .50 ) , these proportions were also not reliably different from chance ( normally decomposable : p .17 ; abnormally decomposable : p .38 ) .
A power test of these analyses , conducted with Gibbs and Nayak ’ s ( 1989 ) effect sizes , showed that the binomial test had a power of .99 for the nondecomposable idioms , .82 for the normally decomposable idioms , and .59 for the abnormally decomposable idioms .
Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) did not provide the percentage of agreement of the decomposable idioms vis-à-vis the nondecom- posable ones .
In the absence of that value , a power analysis established that the minimum reliable percentage of agreement detectable in the present study for decomposable idioms , given an 80 % power level , is 76 % , well above the observed 62.21 % .
Overall , with the possible exception of the data relative to the abnormally decomposable idioms , typically producing weak and anomalous results , the present findings argue against the notion Not at all similar Very similar 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 315IDIOM PROCESSING that people have clear and systematic intuitions on the semantic compositionality of idioms .
The failure to replicate Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) can not be explained on methodological grounds , as the procedures were kept as similar as possible to those used in the original study .
Material selection provides a more likely explanation .
Observation of our data indicated that there was a strong correlation between analyz- ability ratings and proportion of agreement : decomposable rs .93 , p .0001 ; nondecomposable rs .88 , p .0001 ( where rs represents Spearman ’ s rank correlation coefficient ) .
In other words , there were a few expressions on which people had shared intuitions : 16 expressions were agreed upon by 83.54 % of the judges , and this proportion of agreement was highly reliable in a binomial test ( p .01 ) .
However , for the remaining expressions , the agreement was 56.14 % , on average , and did not reliably differ from chance ( p .25 ) .
Similarly , agreement was limited for the normally versus ab- normally decomposable distinction : Only 5 of the decomposable idioms were judged normally or abnormally so by more that 70 % of the judges ( M 74.14 , p .03 ) , whereas for all of the others the mean agreement was a nonreliable 62.58 % ( p .38 ) .
Following Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) , the compositionality rat- ings collected in this study were used to categorize idioms into decomposable and nondecomposable .
However , it is possible that this dichotomization led to an underestimate of the consistency of the judgments.2 To evaluate this possibility , we tested interjudge reliability by means of the Kendall coefficient of concordance .
The value was .13 , indicating that the degree of agreement among raters was indeed very low .
It is likely that the initial selection made by Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) on the basis of their own intuitions led them to use idioms on which people agree , thus overestimating speakers ’ general ability to judge compositionality .
However , with a larger sample of non-preselected expressions ( 80 vs. 40 ) , we observed that speak- ers ’ agreement becomes less evident .
These conclusions are consistent with the observations of Titone and Connine ( 1994 ) .
Using the same procedures employed in Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) and in the present study , Titone and Connine found that only 40 % of their 171 idioms could be clas- sified by speakers as normally decomposable , abnormally decom- posable , or nondecomposable according to Gibb ’ s 75 % agreement criterion .
As in the present study , Titone and Connine concluded that judgments of semantic analyzability are more difficult than has been suggested by Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) .
The present findings indicate that shared intuitions are restricted to a small number of expressions .
In the majority of cases , how- ever , they are not homogeneous .
If for many expressions these intuitions are unclear , however , how can they guide people ’ s views on the syntactic flexibility of the same expressions ?
This claim was tested in Experiment 2 .
Experiment 2 Arguably , the strongest piece of evidence in support of the hypothesis that the more an idiom is seen as decomposable , the more likely it is to be treated as syntactically flexible comes from Gibbs and Nayak ’ s ( 1989 ) Experiment 2 .
Participants were pre- sented with a list of normally , abnormally , and nondecomposable idioms that had been syntactically manipulated according to five operations : present participle , adverb insertion , adjective insertion , passive , and action nominalization .
Participants ’ task was to read each idiom in a particular construction and to judge how similar in meaning it was to a paraphrase of its figurative interpretation .
The results showed that there was a difference in people ’ s ratings of the syntactic changes , as present participle and adverb insertion were the least disruptive of the expressions ’ figurative meaning .
More importantly , participants rated decomposable idioms as more syn- tactically flexible than abnormally and nondecomposable idioms .
Furthermore , there was an interaction between idiom type and type of syntactic change : Disruptive operations , such as adjective in- sertion and passive , were more likely to be accepted with decom- posable than with nondecomposable idioms .
The aim of our Experiment 2 was to replicate Gibbs and Nay- ak ’ s ( 1989 ) study .
However , the present research was conducted in Italian , and not all of the syntactic operations used by Gibbs and Nayak could be used in this language .
In particular , although adverb insertion , adjective insertion , and passive could be main- tained , present participle and action nominalization could not .
In their place , we introduced left dislocation , in which a nominal constituent ( e.g. , ghiaccio / ice in Mario ruppe il ghiaccio / Mario broke the ice ) is moved to the left and is typically substituted in its original position by a clitic pronoun ( e.g. , Il ghiaccio , Mario lo ruppe in breve tempo / The ice , Mario broke it in a short time ; Renzi , Salvi , & Cardinaletti , 1988 ) .
This operation has been pre- viously used to explore the syntactic behavior of Italian idioms and is known to have a rather limited use .
For example , left dislocation in negative sentences gives rise to grammaticality judgments par- allel to those obtained with the insertion of restrictive relative clauses ( Bianchi , 1993 ) .
Participants read a series of idiomatic–paraphrase sentence pairs .
Their task was to judge how similar in meaning the sen- tences in the pairs were .
One third of the sentences contained normally decomposable idioms , one third contained abnormally decomposable idioms , and one third contained nondecomposable idioms .
The idiomatic sentences occurred in four syntactic ver- sions , each paired with a sentence of the same syntactic form that provided a literal paraphrase of the idiomatic sentence .
An exam- ple of the experimental materials is reported in Table 1 .
Normally decomposable idioms were expected to be seen as more flexible than abnormally or nondecomposable idioms .
Fur- thermore , a main effect of syntactic change was predicted , specif- ically , that adverb insertion would be the least disruptive among the four operations .
Finally , we expected a two-way interaction between type of expression and type of syntactic change such that more disruptive operations should be more easily accepted by normally decomposable than by abnormally or nondecomposable idioms .
Method Participants .
Fifty-two undergraduates , all native speakers of Italian and unaware of the purposes of the research , volunteered in the study .
Materials .
From the initial corpus of 80 idioms used in Ex- periment 1 , 10 normally decomposable , 10 abnormally decompos- 2 This possibility was raised by an anonymous reviewer .
316 TABOSSI , FANARI , AND WOLF able , and 10 nondecomposable idioms that could take the passive form were selected so as to have the best analyzability ratings and the highest percentages of agreement .
On the basis of the results of Experiment 1 , the mean ratings of analyzability of the selected idioms were 4.74 ( SD 0.41 ) for the normally decomposable idioms , 4.15 ( SD 0.41 ) for the abnormally decomposable idi- oms , and 2.89 ( SD 0.41 ) for the nondecomposable idioms .
Both normally and abnormally decomposable idioms were reliably dif- ferent from nondecomposable ones , t ( 18 ) 6.88 , p .001 , t ( 18 ) 6.23 , p .001 , respectively .
Percentages of agreement were 64.72 % and 68.89 % for the decomposable and nondecomposable idioms and 61.05 % and 56.84 % for the normally and abnormally decomposable idioms .
Mean values of familiarity were 5.77 ( SD 0.69 ) , 6.36 ( SD 0.18 ) , and 5.19 ( SD 0.27 ) ( see Appendix A ) .
Each idiomatic expression was inserted in an appropriate sen- tential context and syntactically manipulated .
Four operations were performed : ( a ) adverb insertion , ( b ) adjective insertion , ( c ) passive , and ( d ) left dislocation .
Each of these idiomatic sentences was paired with a sentence that maintained , as much as possible , the same syntactic structure and paraphrased its idiomatic meaning .
The four idiomatic sentences and the paired literal paraphrases created for the idiom alzare i tacchi / raise the heels are provided as an example : ( a ) “ Maria alzò immeditamente i tacchi , quando arrivò Pietro [ Maria raised immediately the heels , when Pietro arrived ] ” paraphrased as “ Maria andò immediatamente via , quando Pietro arrivò [ Maria went immediately away when Pietro ar- rived ] ” ; ( b ) “ Luca alzò i rumorosi tacchi uscendo dal ristorante [ Luca raised the noisy heels leaving the restaurant ] ” paraphrased as “ Luca andò rumorosamente via uscendo dal ristorante [ Luca went noisily away leaving the restaurant ] ” ; ( c ) “ I tacchi vennero alzati da Carla , quando entrò il capo ” [ The heels were raised by Carla , when the boss entered ] paraphrased as “ Carla andò via , quando entrò il capo [ Carla went away , when the boss entered ] ” ; and ( d ) “ I tacchi , Livio li alzò per evitare il rivale [ The heels , Livio raised them to avoid the rival ] paraphrased as “ Via Livio andò per evitare il rivale [ Away Livio went to avoid the rival ] . ” A list containing the 120 pairs was created , which was further divided into two blocks .
Both blocks contained all of the idioms twice and an equal number of sentence pairs manipulated accord- ing to the four syntactic operations .
Procedure and design .
Participants received a booklet con- taining one block of 60 sentence pairs presented in a random order , preceded by written instructions .
The participants were asked to read each pair and judge to what extent the meaning of the first sentence was similar to the meaning of the second .
They were instructed to give their judgments on a 7-point scale , ranging from 1 ( no similarity ) to 7 ( great similarity ) .
It was made clear to the participants that they should not base their judgment on what the idiomatic sentence might mean if it were presented in a different form , but rather to make judgments in accordance with the form with which the sentence was actually presented .
An equal number of participants were randomly assigned to one block .
There were two independent variables : type of expression ( nor- mally decomposable vs. abnormally decomposable vs. nondecom- posable ) and type of syntactic change ( adverb insertion vs. adjec- tive insertion vs. passive vs. left dislocation ) .
Results and Discussion Figure 1a presents the mean ratings obtained in the different experimental conditions .
For comparison purposes , Figure 1b de- picting Gibbs and Nayak ’ s ( 1989 ) original data has also been included .
Data were analyzed by participants and by items with two analyses of variance ( ANOVAs ) .
In the participants analysis ( referred to in the analyses below by subscript 1 ) , both independent variables were within-subjects .
In the item analysis ( referred to by subscript 2 ) , type of expression was between-subjects and type of syntactic change was within-subjects .
Table 1 An Example of the Different Syntactic Operations and Their Corresponding Paraphrases in Experiment 2 Syntactic operation Idiomatic expression : Spezzare una lancia / break a lance , “ defend ” Adverb insertion Mario spezza spesso una lancia in favore di Giulia quando gli chiedono un ’ opinione .
Mario breaks often a lance for Giulia when they ask him for an opinion .
Mario prende spesso le difese di Giulia quando gli chiedono un ’ opinione .
Mario often defends Giulia when they ask him for an opinion .
Adjective insertion Mario spezzò una giusta lancia in favore di Giulia quando gli chiesero cosa pensasse .
Mario broke a just lance for Giulia when they asked him his thought .
Mario prese le giuste difese di Giulia quando gli chiesero cosa pensasse .
Mario took the just defense of Giulia when they asked him his thought .
Passive Una lancia fu spezzata da Mario in favore di Giulia quando gli chiesero un ’ opinione .
A lance for Giulia was broken by Mario when they asked his opinion .
Le difese di Giulia furono prese da Mario quando gli chiesero un ’ opinione .
Giulia ’ s defence was taken by Mario when they asked his opinion .
Left dislocation Una lancia in favore di Giulia Mario la spezzò quando gli chiesero la sua opinione .
A lance in favour of Giulia , Mario broke it when they asked his opinion .
Le difese di Giulia Mario le prese quando gli chiesero un ’ opinione .
Mario defended Giulia when they asked his opinion .
317IDIOM PROCESSING Type of syntactic change produced a reliable effect : F1 ( 3 , 153 ) 78.63 , MSE 1.00 , p .01 ; F2 ( 3 , 81 ) 41.96 , MSE 1.16 , p .01 .
Planned comparisons showed that ratings were reliably higher for adverb insertion than for any of the other operations ( adjective vs. adverb insertion ) : F1 ( 1 , 51 ) 124.00 , MSE 1.27 , p .01 ; F2 ( 1 , 27 ) 42.54 , MSE 0.64 , p .01 , which did not differ from one another ( p .10 ) .
In addition , although far from reliable in the item analysis , F2 ( 2 , 27 ) 0.20 , MSE 2.53 , p .82 , the participants analysis indicated an effect of type of idioms , F1 ( 2 , 102 ) 4.63 , MSE 0.82 , p .01 : Abnormally decomposable idioms received reliably lower flexibility ratings ( M 4.08 , SD 1.49 ) than normally decomposable ( M 4.27 , SD 1.49 ) and nondecomposable ( M 4.34 , SD 1.35 ) idioms : abnormally versus normally decom- posable , F1 ( 1 , 51 ) 5.26 , MSE 0.768 , p .02 , which did not differ from each other , F1 ( 1 , 51 ) .36 , MSE 1.17 , p .55 .
Participant analyses also indicated a significant interaction be- tween type of expression and type of syntactic change , F1 ( 6 , 306 ) 7.58 , MSE 0.61 , p .01 .
Planned comparisons showed that , contrary to the predictions derived from the idiom decompo- sition hypothesis , adverb insertion was actually less disruptive in normally decomposable idioms ( M 5.62 , SD 8.21 ) than in the abnormally decomposable ( M 5.20 , SD 8.14 ) or nondecom- posable idioms ( M 5.28 , SD 1.21 ) : normally decomposable versus nondecomposable idioms : F1 ( 1 , 51 ) 4.72 , MSE 0.63 , p .03 .
No other source was reliable in either analysis ( p .20 ) .
Consistent with the findings of Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) , adverb insertion was the least disruptive of all the operations , whereas 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Adverb Insertion Adjective Insertion Passive Left Dislocation Normally Abnormally Nondecomposable Decomposable Decomposable Types of Idioms F le xi b ili ty R at in g s Normally Abnormally Nondecomposable Decomposable Decomposable Types of Idioms F le xi b ili ty R at in g s 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Adverb Insertion Adjective Insertion Passive Action Nominalization Passive Participle A B Figure 1 .
Mean flexibility ratings in the different conditions ( a ) in Experiment 2 and ( b ) in Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) .
Standard deviations were not available in the latter study .
318 TABOSSI , FANARI , AND WOLF there was no evidence of systematic differences among the other operations , as proposed by Fraser ( 1970 ) .
Participants analyses suggested a somewhat peculiar effect of abnormally decomposable idioms , which are known to produce , on occasion , anomalous results ( Gibbs & Nayak , 1989 ) .
However , there was no indication that normally decomposable idioms were seen as more flexible than nondecomposable idioms , and the difference between the two types of expression was , if anything , in favor of the latter .
Again , only by participants was the predicted interaction type of Expression Type of Syntactic Change found .
However , the advantage shown by normally decomposable idioms , which were expected to accept more disruptive operations than the other types of idioms , did , in fact , occur with adverb insertion , which is the least disruptive of all the syntactic changes .
Taken together , the results fail to support one of the central claims of the idiom decomposition hypothesis , namely , that speak- ers view normally decomposable idioms as more syntactically flexible than nondecomposable ones .
Admittedly , compositionality values of the idiomatic expres- sions were somewhat lower in the present study than in Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) , which might explain our failure to replicate the effect of compositionality .
Perhaps , in a limited number of cases , speakers share compositionality intuitions and , for these expres- sions , perceive a relation between compositionality and flexibility .
It is also possible that individuals may differ in their intuitions on compositionality , but such idiosyncratic judgments may nonethe- less form the basis of flexibility judgments.3 The results do not rule out these possibilities .
However , the idiom decomposition hypothesis posits that peo- ple have shared intuitions about compositionality and that these intuitions inform their flexibility judgments , which are also shared .
In fact , according to this theory , compositionality provides the psychological grounds to explain the syntactic behavior of idiom- atic expressions .
In contrast to these claims , the present findings suggest that , in the generality of cases , compositionality does not influence people ’ s intuitions on flexibility .
The next experiment tests whether compositionality affects idiom recognition .
Experiment 3 Using the semantic judgment task , Gibbs and Gonzales ( 1985 ) examined the effect of syntactic flexibility on idiom recognition and found that frozen expressions , that is , expressions with a very low degree of flexibility , were recognized faster than controls , whereas no comparable difference was observed for flexible idi- oms .
However , Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ; Experiment 2 ) collected new analyzability ratings of the 10 flexible and the 10 frozen idioms used in Gibbs and Gonzales ( 1985 ) and , on the basis of these judgments , divided the expressions into normally decom- posable , abnormally decomposable , and nondecomposable .
With respect to analyzability , the new categorization showed that , of the 10 flexible idioms , 6 were normally decomposable , 1 was abnor- mally decomposable , and 3 were nondecomposable , whereas of the 10 nonflexible idioms , 3 were normally decomposable , 5 were abnormally decomposable , and 2 were nondecomposable .
In light of these results , Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ) proposed the hypothesis that the frozenness effect in Gibbs and Gonzales ( 1985 ) was not due to the syntactic deficiencies of these expressions but rather to their semantic analyzability .
Indeed , when the recognition times of the different expressions were reanalyzed , Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ) found that normally and abnormally decom- posable idioms were responded to more quickly than their matched controls , whereas nondecomposable idioms were actually re- sponded to slower than controls .
These results closely replicated another experiment conducted by Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ) using the same methodology .
They concluded that flexibil- ity per se does not affect idiom recognition .
Rather , decomposable idioms , both normal and abnormal , are processed faster than nondecomposable ones , irrespective of flexibility .
These conclusions are theoretically very interesting , but their empirical basis is weak : The 10 flexible and 10 frozen idioms in Gibbs and Gonzales ( 1985 ) were not very different in terms of compositionality , as 7 flexible and 8 frozen expressions were decomposable , and it is difficult to see how 1 item out of 10 could explain the different pattern of data observed for the two types of idioms .
Moreover , semantic analyzability and syntactic flexibility have never been systematically manipulated in the same study .
This was done in the present experiment .
The investigation was restricted to decomposable and nonde- composable idioms , without further distinguishing between nor- mally and abnormally decomposable expressions .
Theoretical and practical considerations guided this choice .
First , the normally– abnormally decomposable distinction is empirically particularly brittle : Abnormally decomposable idioms received the lowest per- centage of agreement in the present study as well as in Gibbs and Nayak ’ s ( 1989 ) Experiment 1 , and in their Experiment 2 these idioms produced anomalous results .
Second , the distinction , intro- duced by Nunberg ( 1978 ) , was subsequently abandoned , and later work concentrated on the characteristics of decomposable expres- sions in general ( Nunberg et al. , 1994 ) .
Third , with respect to recognition , the idiom decomposition hypothesis makes the same predictions for decomposable idioms , whether normally or abnor- mally so .
Participants read a phrase and performed a semantic judgment task , specifically , they had to decide as quickly and as accurately as possible whether the phrase was meaningful in Italian .
The meaningful expressions were familiar verbal idioms or matched controls .
These expressions , created following the same procedure as in Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ) , were meaningful and grammatically acceptable Italian verb phrases obtained by replac- ing the verb , or the verb and the subsequent word in each idiomatic string , with words of comparable length and frequency .
Participants were presented with four types of idiomatic expres- sions : decomposable and flexible ( e.g. , prendere un bidone / take a tin , “ be cheated ” ) , decomposable and nonflexible ( e.g. , perdere il filo / lose the thread , “ forget the topic ” ) , nondecomposable and flexible ( e.g. , appendere al chiodo / hang on the nail , “ give up ” ) , and nondecomposable and nonflexible ( e.g. , mangiare la polvere / eat the dust , “ be defeated ” ) .
According to the idiom decomposition hypothesis , decompos- able idioms should be processed faster than their controls , whereas no such advantage should be found for the nondecomposable idioms .
If flexibility is a by-product of semantic analyzability , it is 3 This possibility was raised by an anonymous reviewer .
319IDIOM PROCESSING not expected to produce any independent effect , once equally distributed over decomposable and nondecomposable expressions .
Method Participants .
Twenty-six undergraduates , all native speakers of Italian and unaware of the purposes of the research , volunteered to participate in the study .
Materials .
The scores collected in Experiment 1 were used to select 40 familiar Italian idioms : Half were decomposable , and half were not .
Within each group , half were syntactically flexible , and half were not .
Flexibility was assessed by means of the same procedure used in Experiment 2 .
Each of the initial 80 expressions selected in Ex- periment 1 were inserted in an appropriate sentential context and syntactically manipulated according to the same operations as in Experiment 2 .
However , because sentences containing intransitive or reflexive verbs are not amenable to the passive operation , only 58 idioms were submitted to all four operations , whereas the remaining 22 idioms underwent only three operations .
Each of these sentences was paired with a sentence that had the same syntactic structure and paraphrased its idiomatic meaning , yielding a total of 298 trials .
A booklet containing written instructions , followed by the list of sentence pairs , was given to 26 Italian judges .
For each idiom , the flexibility scores were computed , averaging on the mean ratings obtained in the three or four constructions in which it occurred .
The mean flexibility score for the 80 idioms was 3.97 ( SD 0.70 ) .
The 10 decomposable and 10 nondecomposable expressions with the best compositionality ratings and the lowest or highest flexi- bility scores were selected for use in the experiment .
Familiarity scores , analyzability ratings , proportions of agree- ment , and flexibility ratings of the four types of idioms are re- ported in Table 2 .
The 40 idioms were matched with 40 control strings .
These were meaningful and grammatically acceptable Italian verb phrases .
The controls were obtained by replacing the verb or the verb and the subsequent word ( typically a preposition ) in each idiomatic string with another verb ( and preposition ) of similar length ( in letters and syllables ) and frequency ( Bortolini , Tagliavini , & Zampolli , 1972 ) .
Test materials are shown in Appendix B .
To ensure that verbs in the idiomatic and control strings were comparable , we constructed a list of 110 items—55 verbs and 55 legal pseudoverbs—and presented them one at the time on a computer screen , in a random order and in two blocks , to 12 participants .
These participants were instructed to press a button with their dominant hand as soon as they saw a meaningful Italian word appear on a screen in front of them .
Response times were collected and analyzed .
The mean lexical decision times for the idiom and the control verbs were 578 ms ( SD 63 ) and 569 ms ( SD 41 ) , respectively ; the decision times did not differ reliably from each other , t ( 39 ) 0.94 , p .35 .
In addition , 200 strings to be used as fillers were created .
The strings were comparable to the test strings for length and structure but did not contain idioms .
Eighty filler strings were acceptable ( e.g. , “ toccare un fiore ” / “ touch a flower ” ) , and 120 were not ( e.g. , “ parlare un dischi ” / “ speak a disks ” ) .
Finally , seven practice trials , conforming to the characteristics of the experimental mate- rials , were devised .
Two experimental lists of 240 trials each were created .
Each list included all of the fillers and 40 test trials : 20 idiomatic and 20 control expressions .
These were selected so that if one idiomatic expression occurred in one list , its matched control occurred in the other list and vice versa .
Moreover , each list contained an equal number of decomposable and nondecomposable , flexible and non- flexible idioms .
Each list was divided into three blocks of 80 trials each .
Different types of idioms , controls , and fillers were evenly distributed across the three blocks .
Within blocks , trials appeared in a pseudorandom order , with the constraint that no more than three trials of the same type occur in a row .
Design .
An equal number of participants were randomly as- signed to each list .
The order of presentation of the blocks was counterbalanced across participants .
There were three independent variables : analyzability ( decomposable vs. nondecomposable ) , flexi- bility ( flexible vs. nonflexible ) , and string type ( idiom vs. control ) .
Procedure .
Participants were tested individually .
Participants sat in a sound-attenuated room , in front of the screen of a Power Macintosh , which controlled the presentation of the experiment and recorded response latencies .
Participants were instructed to read each string and to press a button with their dominant hand as soon as they saw a meaningful Italian phrase ; they had to do nothing otherwise .
The importance of being both accurate and fast was stressed .
After the practice trials , the experiment proper started .
After each block , there was a short interval .
The experi- ment lasted about 45 min .
Each string , which appeared in the center of the screen and was preceded by a tone , stayed on the screen until the participant pressed a button or reset automatically after 3 s. There was a 2-s delay between trials .
Responses were measured from string onset .
Results and Discussion Figure 2a presents the mean response times of correct responses under the different experimental conditions .
Response times over or below two standard deviations from mean response latencies were treated as errors and excluded from analyses .
The overall percentage of errors—including misses , false alarms , and outli- ers—was 6.30 % .
Data were analyzed by participants and by items with two ANOVAs .
In the participants analysis ( denoted by subscript 1 in the analyses below ) , all of the independent variables were within- subjects .
In the item analysis ( denoted by subscript 2 ) , analyzabil- Table 2 Mean Familiarity Scores , Mean Analyzability Ratings , Mean Proportions of Agreement , and Mean Flexibility Ratings of the Four Types of Idioms in Experiment 3 Type of idioms Familiarity M ( SD ) Analyzability M ( SD ) Agreement % Flexibility M ( SD ) Decomposable and flexible 5.98 ( 0.72 ) 4.36 ( 0.54 ) 65.00 4.70 ( 0.56 ) Decomposable and nonflexible 5.94 ( 0.61 ) 4.27 ( 0.49 ) 57.78 3.26 ( 0.45 ) Nondecomposable and flexible 5.87 ( 0.82 ) 2.93 ( 0.38 ) 68.89 4.36 ( 0.30 ) Nondecomposable and nonflexible 5.24 ( 0.73 ) 3.06 ( 0.53 ) 67.22 3.19 ( 0.22 ) 320 TABOSSI , FANARI , AND WOLF ity and flexibility were between-subjects , whereas type of expres- sion was within-subjects .
Only the type of expression was reliable in both analyses : Idiomatic expressions were responded to more quickly than were controls ( M 890 ms SD 211 vs. M 984 ms , SD 273 ) : F1 ( 1 , 25 ) 15.85 , MSE 29,389 , p .0005 ; F2 ( 1 , 36 ) 11.79 , MSE 17,875 , p .0015 .
The difference held for the different groups : In the flexible decomposable group , the mean response time was 867 ms ( SD 197 ) in the idiom condition and 958 ( SD 261 ) in the control condition ; in the flexible nondecomposable group , the mean response time was 849 ms ( SD 215 ) in the idiom condition and 999 ( SD 287 ) in the control condition ; in the nonflexible decomposable group , the mean response time was 884 ms ( SD 209 ) in the idiom condition and 991 ( SD 278 ) in the control condition ; in the nonflexible nondecomposable group , the mean response time was 958 ms ( SD 216 ) in the idiom condition and 990 ( SD 281 ) in the control condition .
In the participants analysis , analyzability and the three-way interaction were also reliable , F1 ( 1 , 25 ) 7.32 , MSE 10,213 , p .012 , and F1 ( 1 , 25 ) 9.78 , MSE 6,197 , p .004 , respectively .
No other source or interaction was reliable in either analysis ( p .15 ) .
Idiomatic expressions were recognized faster than their matched controls , regardless of analyzability .
The same pattern was shared by the two groups of expressions : Decomposable and nondecom- posable idioms had an advantage of approximately 100 ms over their controls .
These results are at odds with Gibbs , Nayak , and R T s ( m s ) 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1 2 3 4 Idiom Control Flexible Non Flexible Flexible Non Flexible Decomposable Nondecomposable Types of Idioms 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1 2 3 4 Idiom Control R T s ( m s ) Flexible Non Flexible Flexible Non Flexible Decomposable Nondecomposable Types of Idioms A B Figure 2 .
Mean response times ( RTs ) under the different conditions in Experiment 3 with all of the expressions and ( b ) with the most homogeneous subset of expressions .
321IDIOM PROCESSING Cutting ( 1989 ) , where nondecomposable idioms were actually responded to more slowly than controls .
The difference between the mean flexibility ratings of the flex- ible and nonflexible idioms was almost identical in the present study and in Gibbs and Gonzales ( 1985 ) .
Nonetheless , the effect of flexibility observed in the Gibbs and Gonzales study was not replicated here .
In fact , data showed no evidence that flexibility per se has an effect on idiom recognition .
Once flexible and nonflexible idioms were equally distributed across decomposable and nondecomposable expressions , syntactic effects were no longer obtained .
Procedures were almost identical in the two studies and thus provide no obvious explanation for the discrepancy .
Materials were also selected in similar ways .
In particular , Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ) used very familiar idioms and selected decom- posable and nondecomposable idioms on the basis of analyzability ratings that were very similar to those of the present materials .
However , in our materials , ratings resulted from very heteroge- neous judgments .
For example , vedere le stelle / see the stars ( “ feel a strong pain ” ) received one of the lowest ratings ( M 2.41 ) , that is , it was one of the clearest instances of nondecom- posable expressions .
However , the mean resulted from a majority of 1-s , 2-s , 3-s and a few 6-s and 7-s responses , suggesting that for some of the judges , the idiom was highly decomposable .
This was not an isolated case , and one might wonder whether this diversity could explain our failure to obtain effects of analyzability .
To test how well our materials reflected people ’ s intuitions on the analyzability of idioms and , consequently , how appropriate they were , we asked three Italian professional linguists , who were unaware of the purposes of the research and unfamiliar with the notion of semantic analyzability as applied to idiomatic expres- sions , to rate the 40 idioms used in this experiment and rated by the naı̈ve participants in Experiment 1 .
We introduced only two changes .
First , in the instructions , the notion of semantic analyz- ability was explained , drawing on Nunberg ’ s ( 1978 ) characteriza- tion and examples .
Second , in the questionnaire , idiomatic expres- sions were presented without a literal paraphrase .
This was done in analogy with Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) , who , in one experiment , used this procedure in order to avoid the risk that actual wording of the paraphrases influences people ’ s judgments .
Gibbs and Nay- ak ’ s study showed no differences between the two procedures .
Overall , the mean analyzability ratings given by the expert and naı̈ve judges in our study were very similar ( M 3.84 , SD 1.51 and M 3.66 , SD 0.82 ) , but there was no reliable correlation between them ( rs .14 , p .37 ) .
In fact , expert and naı̈ve judges agreed on only 21 of the 40 idioms ( See Appendix B ) .
In light of these observations , we reanalyzed the data of Exper- iments 3 , restricting the analyses to the agreed upon items.4 As shown in Figure 2b , idioms were responded to faster than were controls ( M 885 ms , SD 207 vs. M 975 ms , SD 274 ) , F1 ( 1 , 25 ) 24.77 , MSE 16,879 , p .0001 ; F2 ( 1 , 17 ) 4.68 , MSE 18,300 , p .045 .
No other source or interaction ap- proached statistical significance ( p .15 ) .
Even with a very selective set of items , on which people agree about analyzability , no processing difference was observed between decomposable and nondecomposable idioms .
In fact , all of the expressions , regardless of analyzability , were recognized faster than were their controls .
Perhaps , after all , analyzability does not affect recognition .
Evidence for the difference between decomposable and nonde- composable idioms comes from Experiments 1 and 3 in Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ) .
In Experiment 1 , nondecomposable idioms produced response times that were much longer ( M 1,273 ms ) than those of normally and abnormally decomposable idioms ( Ms 1,043 ms and 1,020 ms , respectively ) .
Moreover , responses were more variable for nondecomposable expressions ( SE 81 ) than for any of the other expressions in the study ( range 32–65 ) .
In contrast , the matched controls of nondecom- posable expressions produced responses ( M 1,159 ms , SE 45 ) comparable to those of the other controls ( M 1,166 ms , SE 33 , and M 1,143 ms , SE 65 , respectively ) .
Hence , it is at least plausible that a few nondecomposable idioms that are particularly difficult to recognize determined the longer mean latencies ob- served for this type of expressions .
In Experiment 3 , we reanalyzed the frozen and flexible idioms used in Gibbs and Gonzales ( 1985 ) according to their semantic compositionality .
Nondecomposable idioms produced slower re- sponses ( M 1,282 ms , SE 58 ) than did their controls ( M 1,149 ms , SE 64 ) or the normally and abnormally decomposable idioms ( 1,138 ms , SE 43 and M 1,030 ms , SE 33 , respectively ) .
In addition , the controls of the nondecomposable idioms were reliably faster than were the other controls ( M 1,288 , SE 38 and M 1,357 , SE 61 , respectively ) , which , in turn , were equally as slow as , or slower than , nondecomposable expressions .
Although comparing response times to expressions that have not been specifically matched calls for great caution , the overall pattern of data is consistent with the hypothesis that the controls of the nondecomposable idioms were unexpectedly easy to judge , leading to the observed results .
Hints that the findings in Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ) may reflect some sort of artifact come from inspection of the literature .
For example , according to the mean ratings we obtained from 10 native speakers of American English , 10 of the 22 expressions used by Swinney and Cutler ( 1979 ) were nondecomposable .
Their occurrence , however , did not prevent a clear and reliable advan- tage of idiomatic expressions over controls from being detected .
Conversely , in Gibbs and Gonzales ( 1985 ) , flexible idioms failed to produce faster response times than did their controls , even though 70 % of these expressions were decomposable .
Consistent with these observations , but in contrast with the idiom decompo- sition hypothesis , the present results indicate that , regardless of compositionality , idiom recognition is fast , indeed faster than the recognition of matched literal expressions .
General Discussion The results of the current study lead to conclusions that are very different from those of the idiom decomposition hypothesis .
4 These consisted of 12 decomposable and 9 nondecomposable idioms .
Of the decomposable idioms , 7 were flexible and 5 were not , whereas of the nondecomposable idioms 5 were flexible , and 4 were not .
The mean analyzability ratings for this subset of expressions were the following : for decomposable and flexible , M 4.48 ( SD 0.61 ) , for decomposable and nonflexible , M 4.42 ( SD 0.61 ) , for nondecomposable and flexible , M 2.96 ( SD 0.94 ) , and for nondecomposable and nonflexible , M 2.94 ( SD 0.24 ) .
For the subset , the mean percentages of agreement were 66.67 % , 62.22 % , 70.00 % , and 68.06 % , respectively , and the mean flexi- bility ratings were 5.02 ( SD 0.60 ) , 3.66 ( SD 0.20 ) , 4.81 ( SD 0.15 ) , and 3.58 ( SD 0.20 ) , respectively .
322 TABOSSI , FANARI , AND WOLF Speakers have consistent intuitions about the distinction between decomposable and nondecomposable expressions only for a re- stricted set of idioms , but in the majority of cases , the consistency is low ( Experiment 1 ) .
Analyzability intuitions do not seem to determine judgments of the acceptability of syntactic variation , and adverb insertion is the most accepted operation for all types of expressions ( Experiment 2 ) .
Finally , analyzability does not appear to affect recognition , as decomposable and nondecomposable id- ioms , whether flexible or nonflexible , were both responded to more quickly than their controls ( Experiment 3 ) .
One might argue against the generality of the present results , because they rely on only two potentially insensitive methods : se- mantic similarity judgments ( Experiments 1 and 2 ) and a semantic judgment task ( Experiment 3 ) .
Undoubtedly , there are reasons to question the nature of the semantic judgment task .
To what extent , for instance , does it reflect recognition rather than deeper ( and later ) comprehension processes ?
The tests used in Experiments 1 and 2 are also problematic .
As Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) pointed out , there are no well-specified procedures to establish semantic analyzability .
Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) suggested conceiving of decomposable idioms as those expressions in which the individual components are paradigmatically or syntagmatically related to their idiomatic refer- ents .
The meaning of horse , for example , is paradigmatically related to the meanings of donkey , dog , animal , and so forth and syntagmati- cally related to the meanings of rider , neigh , hay , and so on .
Likewise , in the decomposable idiom pop the question , the content words are paradigmatically related to propose and marriage , respectively , whereas kick and bucket have no semantic relation with die and , hence , kick the bucket is nondecomposable .
However , assuming that the idiomatic referent of break the ice is “ start a conversation ” ( Gibbs & Nayak , 1989 ) , what kind of semantic relation can possibly exist between break and start or between ice and conversation to justify the fact that this expression is a decomposable idiom ?
Even with the proverbial kick the bucket , typically considered a prototypical instance of nondecomposable idioms , there is no general consensus , as it may be treated as a compo- sitional and opaque expression ( Glucksberg , 2001 ) .
It is to the credit of Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) to have devised , despite all of these difficulties , the analyzability tests used thus far .
These tests , however , may capture a number of other semantic di- mensions besides compositionality , in particular , transparency .
In principle there is a clear distinction between analyzability and trans- parency .
In an idiom such as saw logs , for example , none of the parts give an individual contribution to the meaning “ to sleep , ” and .
hence , the expression is nondecomposable , even though the relation between its literal and its idiomatic meaning is transparent to all speakers of English ( Nunberg et al. , 1994 ) .
However , many interviews with the judges in Experiment 1 , all conducted by request after they had completed the questionnaires , suggested that their responses were strongly influenced by the transparency of the idiomatic expressions .
Given these considerations , the methods used by Gibbs and col- leagues ( Gibbs & Nayak , 1989 ; Gibbs , Nayak , & Cutting , 1989 ) allowed them to obtain effects of compositionality in idiom process- ing .
Using the same methods , the present research reaches different conclusions , suggesting that semantic compositionality does not have the psychological role posited by the idiom decomposition hypothesis .
Besides Gibbs and colleagues ( Gibbs & Nayak , 1989 ; Gibbs , Nayak , & Cutting , 1989 ) , three other studies have investigated compositionality , none lending clear support to the hypothesis .
One failed to obtain the effects in production ( Cutting & Bock , 1997 ) .
In Titone and Connine ( 1994 ) , less than half of the idioms received consistent analyzability judgments , whereas for the ma- jority of the idioms , the judgments were inconsistent .
In the eye tracking experiment conducted by Titone and Connine ( 1999 ) , the only detected difference , reliable only by participants , was that the reading rates of nondecomposable idioms were faster when idioms preceded the context than when they followed it .
The present findings corroborate the view that , in fact , for most idioms , people do not have shared intuitions about compositionality .
From a theoretical point of view , the idiom decomposition hypoth- esis , in a simple and elegant way , accounts for the different recogni- tion times obtained by Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ) for decom- posable and nondecomposable expressions .
Implicit in this explanation , however , is the assumption that analyzable and nonana- lyzable idiomatic expressions differ in the ways in which they are mentally represented : The semantic representation of a decomposable idiom is distributed over its individual parts , whereas the semantic representation of a nondecomposable idiom is “ lexicalized ” : A noncompositional analysis of semantically nondecomposable idi- oms would provide little information about the figurative meanings of these expressions .
It is more appropriate to assume that nondecom- posable idioms are understood through recovery of their figurative meanings , which have been directly stipulated as meanings postulates .
( Gibbs , 1989 , p. 67 ) As is often stressed by Gibbs , Nayak , Bolton , and Keppel ( 1989 ) , however , idioms lie on a continuum of compositionality , where highly decomposable and nondecomposable expressions represent the extremes of the continuum .
How , then , should the expressions that for the most part do not occupy these extremes be mentally represented ?
And how should the figurative meanings of the individual parts of decomposable idioms be represented and accessed ?
Make tracks , for instance , means “ depart hurriedly ” and is considered abnormally decomposable by Gibbs and Nayak ( 1989 ) ; how should the figurative meaning of the idiom be dis- tributed over make and tracks ?
Clearly decomposable idioms are also problematic .
One might as- sume , for example , that the mental representation of break includes “ start ” among its senses and that the mental representation of ice includes “ conversation , ” so that these interpretations can be retrieved during the processing of break the ice .
A similar proposal was put forward by Gazdar , Klein , Pullum , and Sag ( 1985 ) , according to whom the semantic rule that translates transitive verbs from NP-type ( noun phrase ) intensions to VP-type ( verb phrase ) denotations should be treated as a partial function .
Through normal principles of compositionality , such a function will assign an idiomatic interpretation to the ice , which serves as the argument of break only in the sense of “ start. ” However , whereas Gazdar et al .
( 1985 ) make no claims on the psychological plausibility of their hypothesis , Gibbs , Nayak , and Cutting ( 1989 ) do make such claims and , in addition , assume that the recognition of decomposable idioms does not require that the expressions be processed literally .
In other words , one does not have to retrieve the literal meaning of ice in order to retrieve its figurative interpretation while processing break the ice .
This view , however , is hardly compatible with current theories of lexical access , which posit that the multiple meanings of a word are usually accessed upon recognition of the word , and even if access may be selective under particular circumstances , the most frequent meaning of the word is always retrieved ( Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson , 2001 ; Tabossi & Sbisà , 2002 ) .
323IDIOM PROCESSING Presumably , all familiar verbal idioms have conventional learned meanings that are retrieved from memory during comprehension , and it is unlikely that there are differences in how they are mentally represented or in the recognition processes they undergo .
Recognition involves the identification of an object as familiar .
In the case of a linguistic object , identification allows one to retrieve from memory many types of infor- mation associated with that object .
The recognition of the printed string CAT , for instance , makes available to the reader the fact that it is a noun ; that it refers to the small , domestic , fur-covered animal that catches mice ; and so forth .
In a similar way , when an idiomatic string is recognized as such , the figurative meaning associated with it is retrieved .
How quickly during string processing the idiomatic meaning is retrieved varies accord- ing to various dimensions ( Fanari , Cacciari , & Tabossi , 2007 ; Tabossi & Zardon , 1995 ) , but , other things being equal , the more familiar an ex- pression is , the easier it is to recognize .
Highly familiar idioms are as easy to recognize precisely as any other string of comparable familiarity .
Insofar as the semantic judgment task reflects fairly early recognition processes ( Swinney & Cutler , 1979 ) , there is no reason to believe that the semantic analyzability of an idiomatic expression should influence its recognition in the citation form .
With respect to recognition processes , there are theories that posit no role of compositionality during recognition and seem better suited to explaining the empirical evidence than the idiom decomposition hypothesis .
For example , the configuration hypothesis ( Tabossi , Fa- nari , & Wolf , 2005 ) suggests that the identification processes of verbal idioms —regardless of compositionality—are nonlexical in nature and involve mechanisms that typically operate at the sentential level .
Idiomatic meanings are associated with configurations of words , the same words that are retrieved from the mental lexicon during literal speech processing .
An idiom occurring in discourse is processed literally , until enough information builds up in the string to render the idiom recognizable as a memorized expression .
Only then is its figurative meaning retrieved .
However , the configuration hypothesis is silent on idiom syntax , whereas it is a great merit of Gibb ’ s work ( Gibbs & Gonzales , 1985 ; Gibbs & Nayak , 1989 ) to have tackled this problem and to have directed psychologists ’ attention to the notion of semantic analyzability .
This , in fact , may well turn out to be very important , though in different ways from those proposed by the idiom decomposition hypothesis .
One way of considering this notion , perhaps more consistent with Nunberg et al. ’ s ( 1994 ) original proposals , is to assume that the semantic and syntactic properties of an idiomatic string ( e.g. , kick the bucket ) and its figurative meaning ( e.g. , “ die suddenly ” ) impose constraints on the operations the expression can undergo .
For exam- ple , kick the bucket refers to an action that corresponds to an unac- cusative verb ( “ die ” ) , which restricts the possibility of using the idiomatic expression in a passive form .
Similarly , “ die suddenly ” is a punctual type of event , and this is why the idiom is not used in the progressive form ( e.g. , “ Mary was kicking the bucket ” * [ nonaccept- able ] ) .
In a similar perspective , the idioms on which people have clear intuitions are at the extremes of a continuum ( Gibbs & Nayak , 1989 ) , whereas most idioms lie in the middle , and for these expressions , the acceptability of an operation is a matter of degree , depending on how readily the operation is compatible with the properties of the strings and their interpretations .
At present , a full-blown theory of how people deal with idiom syntax is not available , and the hypothesis just sketched is no more than speculation .
However , it offers a framework from which to explore the notion of semantic compositionality outside the per- spective of the idiom decomposition hypothesis , which is theoret- ically problematic and empirically ill-grounded .
References Bianchi , V. ( 1993 ) .
An empirical contribution to the study of idiomatic expressions .
Rivista di Linguistica , 5 , 349–385 .
Bortolini , U. , Tagliavini , C. , & Zampolli , A .
( 1972 ) .
Lessico di frequenza della lingua italiana contemporanea [ Lexicon of frequency of the con- temporary Italian language ] .
Milano , Italy : Garzanti .
Cutting , J. C. , & Bock , K. ( 1997 ) .
That ’ s the way of cookie bounces : Syntactic and semantic components of experimental elicited idiom blends .
Memory & Cognition , 25 , 57–71 .
Fanari , R. , Cacciari , C. , & Tabossi , P. ( 2007 ) .
Spoken idiom recognition : The role of length and context .
Manuscript submitted for publication .
Fraser , B .
( 1970 ) .
Idioms within a transformational grammar .
Foundations of Language , 6 , 22–42 .
Gaskell , M. G. , & Marslen-Wilson , W. D. ( 2001 ) .
Lexical ambiguity resolution and spoken word recognition : Bridging the gap .
Journal of Memory and Language , 44 , 325–349 .
Gazdar , G. , Klein , E. , Pullum , G. , & Sag , I .
( 1985 ) .
Generalized phrase structure grammar .
Oxford , United Kingdom : Basil Blackwell .
Gibbs , R. W. , & Gonzales , G. P. ( 1985 ) .
Syntactic frozenness in processing and remembering idioms .
Cognition , 20 , 243–259 .
Gibbs , R. W. , & Nayak , N. P. ( 1989 ) .
Psycholinguistic studies on the syntactic behavior of idioms .
Cognitive Psychology , 21 , 100–138 .
Gibbs , R. W. , Nayak , N. P. , Bolton , J. L. , & Keppel , M. E. ( 1989 ) .
Speakers ’ assumptions about the lexical flexibility of idioms .
Memory & Cognition , 17 , 58–68 .
Gibbs , R. W. , Nayak , N. P. , & Cutting , J. C. ( 1989 ) .
How to kick the bucket and not decompose : Analyzability and idiom processing .
Journal of Memory and Language , 28 , 576–593 .
Glucksberg , S. ( 2001 ) .
Understanding figurative language : From meta- phors to idioms .
Oxford , United Kingdom : Oxford University Press .
Jackendoff , R. ( 1995 ) .
The boundaries of the lexicon .
In M. Everaert , E. J. van der Linden , A. Schenk , & R. Schroeder ( Eds .
) , Idioms : Structural and psychological perspectives ( pp .
133–165 ) .
Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum .
Nunberg , G. ( 1978 ) .
The pragmatics of reference .
Bloomington : Indiana University Linguistics Club .
Nunberg , G. , Sag , I. , & Wasow , T. ( 1994 ) .
Idioms .
Language , 70 , 491–534 .
Quartu , B. M. ( 2000 ) .
Dizionario dei modi di dire della lingua italiana [ Dictionary of ways to say the Italian language ] .
Milano , Italy : RCS Libri S.p.A. Renzi , L. , Salvi , G. , & Cardinaletti , A .
( 1988 ) .
Grande grammatica Itali- ana di consultazione : Vol .
I .
La frase : I sintagmi nominale e preposiz- ionale [ Great Italian Consultation Grammar : Vol .
1 .
The nominal and prepositional phrase ] .
Bologna , Italy : Il Mulino .
Swinney , D. A. , & Cutler , A .
( 1979 ) .
The access and processing of idiomatic expressions .
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 18 , 522–534 .
Tabossi , P. , Fanari , R. , & Wolf , K. ( 2005 ) .
Spoken idiom recognition : Meaning retrieval and word expectancy .
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research , 34 , 465–495 .
Tabossi , P. , & Sbisà , M. ( 2002 ) .
Methodological issues in the study of lexical ambiguity resolution .
In D. S. Gorfein ( Ed .
) , On the consequence of meaning selection : Perspectives on resolving lexical ambiguity ( pp .
11–28 ) .
Washington , DC : American Psychological Association .
Tabossi , P. , & Zardon , F. ( 1995 ) .
The activation of idiomatic meaning .
In M. Everaert , E. J. van der Linden , A. Schenk , & R. Schroeder ( Eds .
) , Idioms : Structural and psychological perspectives ( pp .
273–299 ) .
Hill- sdale , NJ : Erlbaum .
Titone , D. A. , & Connine , C. M. ( 1994 ) .
Descriptive norms for 171 idiomatic expressions : Familiarity , compositionality , predictability , and literality .
Metaphor and Symbolic Activity , 9 , 247–270 .
Titone , D. , & Connine , C. ( 1999 ) .
On the compositional and noncompositional nature of idiomatic expressions .
Journal of Pragmatics , 31 , 1655–1674 .
324 TABOSSI , FANARI , AND WOLF Appendix A List of 80 Italian Idioms Used in Experiment 1 The idioms are presented in Italian , as presented to judges , along with their literal English translations and their meanings .
The initial 10 strings in each group ( marked with an asterisk ) were also used in Experiment 2 .
The translations of the Italian idioms are literal .
Normally Decomposable Idioms Idiomatic expression Meaning of the idiom Alzare i tacchi / raise the heels* Go away Avere il muso / have the snout* Be angry Cambiare aria / change air* Change environment Cambiare bandiera / change flag* Change position Coprire le spalle / cover the shoulders* Protect Lasciare il campo / leave the field* Give up the undertaking Mostrare i denti / show the teeth* Behave aggressively Tastare il terreno / feel the ground* Probe Trovare la chiave / find the key* Find the solution Vuotare il sacco / empty the sack* Reveal everything Andare in fumo / go to smoke Be unfulfilled Andare alla fonte / go to the source Find the origin Andare contro corrente / go against the stream Act against the habits Arrivare in porto / get to the harbor Get to the end Avere in mano / have in hand Have at disposal Avere sulle spalle / have on the shoulders Bear [ a responsibility ] Cambiare disco / change disk Change the subject Chinare la testa / bend the head Submit Contare sulle dita / count on the fingers Be few people Dare un taglio / give a cut Conclude Grattarsi la pancia / scratch one ’ s belly Laze around Passare la palla / pass the ball Give away a responsibility Scendere in piazza / go down in the square Demonstrate publicly Stringere i denti / grit the teeth Bear with great effort Tirare la cinghia / tighten the belt Save money Uscire dal guscio / come out from the shell Come out from isolation Abnormally Decomposable Idioms Idiomatic expression Meaning of the idiom Aprire gli occhi / open the eyes* Realize Aspettare al varco / wait at the passage* Wait for the revenge time Perdere il filo / lose the thread* Forget the subject Prendere un bidone / take a tin* Be cheated Rompere il ghiaccio / break the ice* Start a conversation Spianare la strada / level the road* Facilitate Succhiare il sangue / suck the blood* Take advantage Tagliare la corda / cut the rope* Run away Tagliare le gambe / cut the legs* Put down Voltare pagina / turn the page* Change lifestyle Abboccare all ’ amo / bite the bait Be cheated Andare a fondo di qualcosa / get to bottom of something Clarify the obscure aspects of something Andare alla deriva / go adrift Give up to the adverse fortune Cadere in piedi / fall on one ’ s own feet Come out unharmed Essere sulle spine / be on the thorns Be tense Tenere in caldo / keep in heat Keep a good opportunity for later use Uscire dal tunnel / go out from the tunnel Come out from a desperate situation ( Appendixes continue ) 325IDIOM PROCESSING Nondecomposable Idioms Idiomatic expression Meaning of the expression Abbassare la cresta / lower the crest* Curtail the pretensions Alzare le spalle / raise the shoulders* Display indifference Attaccare un bottone / sew on a button* Keep in conversation Avere i numeri / have the numbers* Have the capabilities Avere il bernoccolo / have the bump* Have a bent Ingoiare una pillola / swallow a pill* Accept something unpleasant Lustrare le scarpe / polish the shoes* Flatter Mettere nel sacco / put in the sack* Swindle Spezzare una lancia / break a lance* Defend Tirare la carretta / pull the two-wheel cart* Live a difficult life Accendere un cero / light a candle Thank for avoiding a danger Alzare il gomito / raise the elbow Drink too much Appendere al chiodo / hang on the nail Give up [ an activity ] Buttarsi dietro le spalle / throw behind the shoulders Forget Cadere dalle nuvole / fall from the clouds To be astonished at something trivial Cadere nella rete / fall into the net Be cheated Chiudere un occhio / close an eye Be indulgent Contare le pecore / count the sheep Try to sleep Dare corda / give rope Give freedom of action Essere a cavallo / be on horseback Be in a safe position Essere al fresco / be at the fresh Be in jail Essere all ’ asciutto / be at the dry Be penniless Fare i conti / make the counts Clarify Far pressione / put pressure Press [ someone ] Gettare la spugna / throw the sponge Surrender Guardarsi allo specchio / look at oneself in the mirror Examine one ’ s own conscience Legarsela al dito / tie something to one ’ s own finger Remember an offense Mangiare la polvere / eat the dust Be defeated Mettere in piedi / put on feet Start Piovere sul bagnato / rain on the wet Accumulate misfortunes Prendere la porta / take the door Go away Prendere per il naso / take by the nose Cheat Prendere un granchio / take a crab Make a blunder Scaldare il banco / heat the bench Be lazy at school Tirare la corda / pull the rope Exaggerate Toccare il fondo / touch the bottom Reach the most negative point in a situation Vedere le stelle / see the stars Feel a strong pain 326 TABOSSI , FANARI , AND WOLF Appendix B Idiomatic and Control Expressions Used in Experiment 3 The idioms are given in Italian , as presented to participants , along with their English translations and meanings .
Items used in the re-analysis are thus denoted .
The translations of the Italian idioms are literal .
Decomposable Idioms Flexible Idiomatic expression Meaning of the idiom Control expression Lasciare il campo / leave the field Give up the undertaking ( re-analysis ) Guardare il campo / watch the field Prendere un bidone / take a tin Be cheated ( re-analysis ) Vuotare un bidone / empty a bin Tastare il terreno / feel the ground Probe ( re-analysis ) Vendere il terreno / sell the land Tenere in caldo / keep in heat Keep a good opportunity for later use ( re-analysis ) Andare al caldo / go to a warm place Trovare la chiave / find the key Find the solution ( re-analysis ) Rompere la chiave / break the key Uscire dal tunnel/go out from the tunnel Come out from a desperate situation ( re-analysis ) Guidare nel tunnel/drive in the tunnel Vuotare il sacco / empty the sack Reveal everything ( re-analysis ) Cucire un sacco / sew a sack Dare un taglio / give a cut Conclude Farsi un taglio / cut oneself Stringere i denti / grit the teeth Bear with great effort Rompersi i denti / break one ’ s teeth Tirare la cinghia / tighten the belt Save money Bucare la cinghia / pierce the belt flexible Nonflexible Avere sulle spalle/have on the shoulders Bear [ a responsibility ] ( re-analysis ) Tenere sulle spalle / keep on the shoulders Coprire le spalle / cover the shoulders Protect ( re-analysis ) Lavarsi le spalle / wash one ’ s shoulders Mostrare i denti / show the teeth Behave aggressively ( re-analysis ) Lavarsi i denti / brush one ’ s teeth Passare la palla / pass the ball Give away a responsibility ( re-analysis ) Giocare a palla / play with the ball Perdere il filo / lose the thread Forget the subject ( re-analysis ) Cucire col filo / sew with the thread Abboccare all ’ amo / bite the bait Be cheated Comprare un amo / buy a bait Alzare i tacchi / raise the heels Go away Rompere i tacchi / break the heels Aprire gli occhi / open the eyes Realize Girare gli occhi / turn the eyes Grattarsi la pancia / scratch one ’ s belly Laze around Bagnarsi la pancia / get wet one ’ s belly Tagliare le gambe / cut the legs Put down Rompersi le gambe / Break one ’ s legs Nondecomposable Idioms Flexible Idiomatic expression Meaning of the idiom Control expression Alzare il gomito / raise the elbow Drink too much ( re-analysis ) Muovere il gomito / move the elbow Gettare la spugna / throw the sponge Surrender ( re-analysis ) Bagnare la spugna / wet the sponge Mettere in piedi / put on feet Start ( re-analysis ) Lavarsi i piedi / wash one ’ s feet Mettere nel sacco / put in the sack Swindle ( re-analysis ) Portare un sacco / bring a sack Appendere al chiodo / hang on the nail Give up ( an activity ) Attaccare al chiodo / hung to the nail Attaccare un bottone / sew on a button Keep the conversation Ricucire un bottone / re-sew the button Avere i numeri / have the numbers Have the capabilities Giocare i numeri / gamble Avere il bernoccolo / have the bump Have a bent Farsi un bernoccolo / make oneself a bump Prendere un granchio / take a crab Make a blunder Mangiare un granchio / eat a crab Spezzare una lancia / break a lance Defend Comprare una lancia / buy a lance Nonflexible Idiomatic expression Meaning of the idiom Control expression Fare i conti / make the counts Clarify ( re-analysis ) Controllare i conti / check the counts Lustrare le scarpe / polish the shoes Flatter ( re-analysis ) Comprare le scarpe / buy the shoes Mangiare la polvere / eat the dust Be defeated ( re-analysis ) Togliere la polvere / take off the dust Tirare la carretta/pull the two-wheel cart Live a difficult life ( re-analysis ) Avere una carretta / have a two-wheel cart Alzare le spalle / raise the shoulders Display indifference Muovere le spalle / move the shoulders Cadere nella rete / fall into the net Be cheated Tirare la rete / cast the net Contare le pecore / count the sheep Try to sleep Vendere le pecore / sell the sheep Dare corda / give rope Give freedom of action Legare una corda / tie a rope Essere a cavallo / be on horseback Be in a safe position Andare a cavallo / ride a horse Ingoiare una pillola / swallow a pill Accept something unpleasant Prendere una pillola / take a pill Received May 9 , 2006 Revision received October 5 , 2007 Accepted October 8 , 2007 327IDIOM PROCESSING
