vonhippel2008.pdf
atN7ST7P9tMKFIFP0W1boz8BxGJ8-vonhippel2008.pdf.plain.html

Research Report Implicit Prejudice Toward Injecting Drug Users Predicts Intentions to Change Jobs Among Drug and Alcohol Nurses William von Hippel,1 Loren Brener,2 and Courtney von Hippel1 1University of Queensland and 2University of New South Wales ABSTRACT—The meaning and importance of implicit prej- udice is a source of considerable debate .
One way to ad- vance this debate is to assess whether implicit prejudice can predict independent variance , beyond that predicted by explicit prejudice , in meaningful and unambiguous be- haviors or behavioral intentions .
In the current research , drug and alcohol nurses reported their level of stress work- ing with injecting drug users , their job satisfaction , their explicit prejudice toward injecting drug users , and their intentions to leave drug and alcohol nursing .
The nurses also completed the Single Category Implicit Association Test , which measured their implicit prejudice toward in- jecting drug users .
Analyses revealed that implicit preju- dice was a significant mediator , beyond explicit prejudice and job satisfaction , of the relation between job stress and intention to change jobs .
The advent of techniques that enable researchers to measure implicit ( or unconscious ) attitudes has led to an explosion of research and theory across nearly all the subdisciplines of psy- chology .
Research in social psychology ( Richeson & Shelton , 2003 ) , clinical psychology ( Teachman & Woody , 2003 ) , consumer psychology ( Maison , Greenwald , & Bruin , 2004 ) , organization- al psychology ( von Hippel , 2006 ) , and cognitive neuroscience ( Cunningham et al. , 2004 ) has relied on measures of implicit attitudes to examine issues that were difficult to address with traditional measures of attitudes .
The area that has seen the most activity is implicit prejudice,1 because people are often un- willing or unable to report their prejudicial feelings ( Dovidio & Gaertner , 1998 ) , and implicit measures allow researchers to circumvent problems associated with self-report .
Despite ( or perhaps because of ) this burgeoning research literature , there remains substantial controversy over whether implicit-prejudice measures really tap prejudicial feelings .
In large part , this controversy has centered on whether implicit- prejudice measures can predict independent variance in be- havior that is consequential and unambiguous ( Arkes & Tetlock , 2004 ) .
Indeed , this controversy has even moved into law and human resources , where proponents and opponents of the con- struct of implicit prejudice debate its applicability to equal- employment-opportunity practices ( Greenwald & Krieger , 2006 ; Kang & Banaji , 2006 ; Mitchell & Tetlock , in press ; Tetlock & Mitchell , in press ) .
At the moment , this debate appears to have reached an im- passe , as proponents of implicit measures argue that they pre- dict a number of important behavioral outcomes , whereas skeptics argue that these behavioral outcomes are themselves ambiguous .
For example , a number of studies show that implicit prejudice predicts nonverbal distancing ( e.g. , minimal eye con- tact ; for a meta-analysis , see Poehlman , Uhlmann , Greenwald , & Banaji , 2007 ) , but nonverbal distancing could be a sign of animosity , distaste , nervousness , unfamiliarity , or even concern that one might be regarded as prejudiced ( Arkes & Tetlock , Address correspondence to William von Hippel , School of Psychol- ogy , University of Queensland , St. Lucia 4072 , Australia , e-mail : billvh @ psy.uq.edu.au .
1We use the term implicit prejudice to refer to implicit attitudes toward members of different groups .
Although prejudice is typically conceived as a negative attitude , at this point one can only assess an individual ’ s relative position on the continuum from positive to negative implicit attitudes , as the psychometrics of implicit measures are insufficiently established to allow identification of a particular individual as implicitly prejudiced ( Blanton & Jaccard , 2006 ) .
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE Volume 19—Number 1 7Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science at UNIV OF MICHIGAN on March 5 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from 2004 ; Tetlock & Arkes , 2004 ) .
Many other behaviors have been predicted by implicit-prejudice measures , but in all cases this basic concern applies ( see Arkes & Tetlock , 2004 ; Tetlock & Mitchell , in press ) .
Thus , one way to move this debate forward would be to assess whether implicit prejudice can predict in- dependent variance—beyond that explained by explicit preju- dice—in meaningful and unambiguous behaviors or behavioral intentions .
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF IMPLICIT PREJUDICE Because prejudiced thoughts conflict with universally held egalitarian beliefs , people are typically unwilling to acknowl- edge their own prejudices , and are thought to push them into unconsciousness ( Dovidio & Gaertner , 1998 ) .
For this reason , implicit and explicit prejudice should frequently be dissociated , and this is often the case ( Poehlman et al. , 2007 ) .
As a conse- quence , prejudice is a domain in which implicit attitudes are ( theoretically ) likely to predict independent variance in be- havior , and indeed implicit-prejudice measures have been found to predict behavior better than explicit-prejudice mea- sures do ( Poehlman et al. , 2007 ) .
Again , however , there is controversy about the meaning of the behaviors examined in this research ( Arkes & Tetlock , 2004 ; Tetlock & Mitchell , in press ) .
In the research reported in this article , we extended previous research by examining whether implicit prejudice can predict unambiguous and important behavioral intentions that theoret- ically and logically follow from prejudicial feelings.We did so by assessing whether implicit and explicit prejudice toward in- jecting drug users ( IDUs ) can predict drug and alcohol ( D & A ) nurses ’ intentions to leave D & A nursing .
Although intention to change jobs is not an actual behavior , it served as our primary dependent measure for two reasons .
First , responses to the specific question regarding intentions to change jobs remain the best predictor of voluntary job turnover ( van Breukelen , van der List , & Steensma , 2004 ) .
Second , intentions to change jobs have an advantage over actual turnover in that they are less influ- enced by environmental factors such as the availability of al- ternative employment ( Gerhart , 1990 ) .
D & A nurses provide a prototypical case of modern prejudice .
On the one hand , IDUs can be challenging clients ( e.g. , Syl- vestre , Litwin , Clements , & Gourevitch , 2005 ) , and medical contact with them might sometimes reinforce stereotypes that this group is chaotic and unmanageable .
On the other hand , medical models of drug use as a disease promote sympathy for IDUs .
Such feelings of sympathy might be particularly wide- spread among D & A nurses , who have chosen to focus their ca- reers on helping people with D & A problems .
Thus , D & A nurses might be particularly likely to have negative implicit attitudes that are not mirrored by their explicit feelings .
This logic suggests that implicit attitudes among D & A nurses might independently predict burnout and turnover , which are prevalent problems in this subfield of medical care ( Duraising- am , Pidd , Roche , & O ’ Connor , 2006 ; Gallon , Gabriel , & Knudsen , 2003 ) .
That is , D & A staff might continue to believe explicitly that IDUs are worthy of care and sympathy , but might nevertheless harbor negative implicit attitudes toward these clients that could eventually induce them to leave D & A nursing .
Accordingly , we propose the following model : First , challenging behaviors on the part of IDU clients will lead to feelings of job stress among D & A nurses .
Second , stress , in turn , will predict the nurses ’ intentions to leave D & A nursing .
Third , the effect of stress on intentions to change jobs will be mediated by implicit prejudice toward IDUs , and this effect will be independent of the effect of stress on explicit prejudice and job attitudes .
The goal of the current researchwas to test this model.We emphasized the mediating role of implicit prejudice , as the other components of the model are supported by previous research ( e.g. , Blegen , 1993 ; Borda & Norman , 1997 ; Bourbonnais , Comeau , Vézina , & Guylaine , 1998 ; Duraisingam et al. , 2006 ) .
METHOD Participants Forty-four D & A nurses in the Sydney metropolitan area partic- ipated in this experiment in return for a gift voucher of 25 Australian dollars ( $ 20 U.S. ) .
Nurses were recruited from D & A treatment facilities , needle and syringe exchange pro- grams , and primary-care facilities that cater to IDUs .
Materials and Procedure The nurses completed the various scales and tasks on a laptop computer .
First , they completed a 9-item scale measuring prejudice toward IDUs ( e.g. , ‘ ‘ People should feel sympathetic and understanding of injecting drug users ’ ’ ; positive items were reverse-scored ; Brener & von Hippel , in press ) .2 Next , they completed a 4-item abbreviatedmeasure of job satisfaction ( e.g. , ‘ ‘ I feel satisfied with my present job ’ ’ ; Brayfield & Rothe , 1951 ) and then responded to a single item assessing intentions to change jobs ( ‘ ‘ During the next year , I will probably look for a new job in another area of nursing ’ ’ ; Price & Mueller , 1986 ) .
Re- sponses to the prejudice , job-satisfaction , and job-intentions items were provided on 5-point scales , anchored by strongly disagree and strongly agree .
Participants then completed a 12-item challenging-behaviors scale assessing the frequency with which their IDU clients ex- hibited a variety of negative behaviors ( e.g. , verbal abuse or stealing ) and positive behaviors ( e.g. , appreciation or following their treatment regimen ) during treatment ( positive items were reverse-scored ) .
Answers to these questions were provided on 4- point scales , with the verbal labels of never , rarely , sometimes , 2This measure of explicit prejudice is well suited for the current research , as it predicts discriminatory treatment of IDU clients by health care workers ( Brener , von Hippel , Kippax , & Preacher , 2007 ) .
8 Volume 19—Number 1 Implicit Prejudice and Job Turnover at UNIV OF MICHIGAN on March 5 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from and often .
The nurses then responded to 2 items indicating how frequently they were stressed by their experiences working with IDU clients ( ‘ ‘ Working with injecting drug users is really a strain for me , ’ ’ ‘ ‘ Working with injecting drug users directly puts too much stress on me ’ ’ ) .
Answers to these questions were provided on a 6-point scale ranging from never to every day .
After finishing these self-report items , participants completed the Single Category Implicit Association Test ( SC-IAT ; Kar- pinski & Steinman , 2007 ) , which measured implicit attitudes toward IDUs .
The SC-IAT is a timed procedure adapted from the Implicit Association Test ( Greenwald , McGhee , & Schwartz , 1998 ) .
Participants first used one key on a computer keyboard to respond both to words referring to positive attributes and to words referring to IDUs and used a different key to respond to words referring to negative attributes , and then this pattern was reversed so that one key was used to respond to negative attri- butes and to IDUs and the other key was used to respond to positive attributes .
In this procedure , implicit attitudes are as- sessed as the relative ease ( i.e. , speed ) with which positive versus negative attributes ( e.g. , wonderful vs. awful ) are paired with the attitude concept ( in this case , IDUs , as represented by terms such as heroin injector , speed injector , and cocaine injector ) .
Terms for IDUs were paired with positive attributes in the first block of 72 trials and with negative attributes in the second block of 72 trials , and participants completed 25 practice trials prior to each set of 72 critical trials .
The SC-IAT has an ad- vantage over the IAT in studies such as this one , in that there is no category that contrasts clearly with IDUs .
Finally , the nurses indicated howmany hours they had workedwith IDUs in the past week .
RESULTS The two self-report stress items were highly correlated ( r5 .82 , p < .001 ) , so they were collapsed into a single measure .
Like- wise , the reliabilities of the challenging-behaviors scale ( a 5 .74 ) , the job-satisfaction scale ( a 5 .83 ) , and the prejudice- toward-IDUs scale ( a5 .83 ) were adequate .
Finally , the SC-IAT was scored by subtracting the response times when IDUs were paired with negative attributes from the response times when IDUs were paired with positive attributes , and this difference score was divided by the standard deviation of the response times ( after eliminating error trials and trials with very slow and fast responses , as in Karpinski & Steinman , 2007 ) .3 Reliability of the SC-IATwas computed ( as in Karpinski & Steinman , 2007 ) using the Spearman-Brown correction , which revealed adequate reliability ( radjusted 5 .74 ) .
Higher SC-IAT scores indicate greater implicit prejudice toward IDUs , and the SC-IAT score can be considered a measure of effect size as it is in standard- deviation units ( see Table 1 for descriptive statistics for all variables ) .
As Table 1 shows , SC-IAT scores were greater than zero , t ( 42 ) 5 4.16 , p < .001 , although whether this finding in- dicates that the nurses on average exhibited implicit prejudice toward IDUs is unclear , as the zero point may or may not reflect the cutoff between prejudiced and nonprejudiced responses ( Blanton & Jaccard , 2006 ) .
We computed bivariate correlations between all of the vari- ables ( see Table 2 ) and then estimated a regression-based causal model ( see Fig .
1 ) .
The model included number of hours worked with IDUs as a control variable , although it did not have a dis- cernible effect on any of the relationships .
As Figure 1 shows , challenging behaviors by IDUs predicted self-reported stress of nurses working with these clients .
Stress , in turn , predicted intention to change jobs .
This relation between stress and in- tention to change jobs was significantly mediated by implicit prejudice ( indirect effect 5 .175 , SE 5 .098 , 95 % confid- ence interval : .053 , .490 ) but not by explicit prejudice ( indirect effect 5 .013 , SE 5 .218 , 95 % confidence interval : .355 , .520 ) or job satisfaction ( indirect effect5 .258 , SE5 .192 , 95 % confidence interval : .087 , .686 ) .4 Furthermore , with the me- diators in the model , the direct effect of stress on intention to change jobs was no longer significant ( see Fig .
1 ) .
To further establish the validity of the model presented in Figure 1 , we explored various competing models .
First , when job satisfaction was removed from the model , implicit prejudice remained a significant mediator , and the direct effect of stress on intention to change jobs remained nonsignificant ( b5 .27 , p > .10 ) .
In contrast , when implicit prejudice was removed from the model and job satisfaction left in , the direct effect of stress on intention to change jobs was significant ( b 5 .37 , p < .05 ) .
In neither of these alternative models was explicit prejudice a significant predictor of intention to change jobs .
Next , when the model was rearranged , and either stress or implicit prejudice TABLE 1 Descriptive Statistics Variable Minimum Maximum Mean SD Frequency of challenging behaviors 1.50 2.83 2.26 0.32 Self-reported stress 1.00 4.00 2.08 0.77 Job satisfaction 1.50 5.00 3.78 0.75 Explicit prejudice 1.00 3.44 2.16 0.60 Implicit prejudice 0.74 1.12 0.26 0.41 Hours worked with injecting drug users 1 40 20.61 12.08 Intention to change jobs 1.00 5.00 2.45 1.23 3To ensure that these data-preparation procedures were not responsible for any of the results , we also conducted all of the analyses using the original SC- IAT response times , without removing excessively fast or slow trials and without removing incorrect responses .
These ‘ ‘ raw ’ ’ SC-IAT scores were correlated ( r 5 .96 ) with the ‘ ‘ corrected ’ ’ scores , and all analyses with the corrected measure remained significant when this raw measure was used instead .
4To obtain accurate confidence limits , we computed indirect effects from unstandardized regression weights with 10,000 bootstrap resamples , following the syntax provided by Preacher and Hayes ( 2007 ) .
Volume 19—Number 1 9 William von Hippel , Loren Brener , and Courtney von Hippel at UNIV OF MICHIGAN on March 5 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from was treated as the criterion variable , none of the possible me- diational models were significant .
Next , we calculated the partial correlation between implicit prejudice and intention to change jobs while controlling for explicit prejudice ; this analysis re- vealed that implicit prejudice predicted independent variance in intention to change jobs ( pr5 45 , p < .01 ) .
Finally , to ensure that outliers were not responsible for the relation between im- plicit prejudice and intention to change jobs , we calculated a series of correlations and partial correlations ( controlling for explicit prejudice ) between implicit prejudice and intention to change jobs after removing the three lowest and three highest values on the SC-IAT one at a time , beginning with the most extreme values , and after removing the single person who re- sponded ‘ ‘ strongly agree ’ ’ to the item assessing intention to change jobs .
These correlations and partial correlations fluc- tuated slightly up and down with removal of the various scores , but were all significant .
DISCUSSION The results of the current study have direct bearing on the de- bate concerning the meaning of implicit prejudice ( and implicit attitudes more generally ) .
In the current research , D & A nurses reported more frequent experiences of stress if they experienced TABLE 2 Correlations Between Measures Variable Frequency of challenging behaviors Self-reported stress Job satisfaction Explicit prejudice Implicit prejudice Hours worked with IDUs Self-reported stress .44nn Job satisfaction .19 .45nn Explicit prejudice .13 .60nnn .59nnn Implicit prejudice .17 .40nn .33n .26 Hours worked with IDUs .32n .14 .24 .13 .01 Intention to change jobs .16 .51nn .53nnn .45nn .51nn .04 Note .
IDUs 5 injecting drug users .
np < .05. nnp < .01. nnnp < .001 .
Fig .
1 .
The mediated effect of stress on intention to change jobs among drug and alcohol ( D & A ) nurses .
Path coefficients represent standardized regression weights .
Stress was measured as the stress the nurses experienced working with injecting drug users ( IDUs ) as clients .
The coefficient above the path from self-reported stress to intention to quit D & A nursing represents the direct effect with no mediators in the model ; the coefficient below this path represents the direct effect when the mediators are included in the model .
Coefficients significantly different from zero are indicated by asterisks , np < .05 , nnp < .01 , nnnp < .001 .
10 Volume 19—Number 1 Implicit Prejudice and Job Turnover at UNIV OF MICHIGAN on March 5 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from a greater frequency of challenging behaviors from their IDU clients .
These experiences of stress , in turn , were predictive of intentions to change jobs , with nurses who reported greater stress also reporting a greater intention to leave D & A nursing for another area of nursing in the upcoming year .
Most important , the relation between experiences of stress and intentions to quit D & A nursing was mediated by implicit prejudice , but not by ex- plicit prejudice .
Indeed , in this study , implicit prejudice played a clearer role than job satisfaction inmediating the relation between stress and intention to change jobs .
Thus , the current results provide the clearest evidence to date that implicit attitudes predict independent variance—beyond that predicted by explicit atti- tudes—in a behavioral intention that is both important and unambiguous in meaning .
In so doing , the current results demon- strate that implicit attitudes can independently motivate impor- tant , life-changing behaviors .
It remains for future research to assess whether these results generalize to domains that do not involve such a potent mix of sympathy and challenging behavior .
Acknowledgments—This research was funded by grants from the Australian Research Council .
REFERENCES Arkes , H. , & Tetlock , P.E .
( 2004 ) .
Attributions of implicit prejudice , or ‘ ‘ Would Jesse Jackson ‘ fail ’ the Implicit Association Test ? ’ ’ Psy- chological Inquiry , 15 , 257–278 .
Blanton , H. , & Jaccard , J .
( 2006 ) .
Arbitrary metrics in psychology .
American Psychologist , 61 , 27–41 .
Blegen , M.A .
( 1993 ) .
Nurses ’ job satisfaction : A meta-analysis of re- lated variables .
Nursing Research , 42 , 36–41 .
Borda , R.G. , & Norman , I.J .
( 1997 ) .
Factors influencing turnover and absence of nurses : A research review .
International Journal of Nursing Studies , 34 , 385–394 .
Bourbonnais , R. , Comeau , M. , Vézina , M. , & Guylaine , D. ( 1998 ) .
Job strain , psychological distress , and burnout in nurses .
American Journal of Industrial Medicine , 34 , 20–28 .
Brayfield , A.H. , & Rothe , H.F. ( 1951 ) .
An index of job satisfaction .
Journal of Applied Psychology , 35 , 307–311 .
Brener , L. , & von Hippel , W. ( in press ) .
Measuring attitudes to- wards injecting drug users and hepatitis C. Substance Use and Misuse .
Brener , L. , von Hippel , W. , Kippax , S. , & Preacher , K.J .
( 2007 ) .
Prejudice and discrimination in the health care of people with hepatitis C. Manuscript submitted for publication .
Cunningham , W.A. , Johnson , M.K. , Raye , C.L. , Gatenby , J.C. , Gore , J.C. , & Banaji , M.R .
( 2004 ) .
Separable neural components in the pro- cessing of Black and White faces .
Psychological Science , 15 , 806–813 .
Dovidio , J.F. , & Gaertner , S.L .
( 1998 ) .
On the nature of contemporary prejudice : The causes , consequences , and challenges of aversive racism .
In J.L .
Eberhardt & S.T .
Fiske ( Eds .
) , Confronting racism : The problem and the response ( pp .
3–32 ) .
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .
Duraisingam , V. , Pidd , K. , Roche , A.M. , & O ’ Connor , J .
( 2006 ) .
Stress , satisfaction and retention among alcohol and other drug workers in Australia .
Adelaide , Australia : Flinders University , National Centre for Education and Training on Addiction .
Gallon , S.L. , Gabriel , R.M. , & Knudsen , J.R.W .
( 2003 ) .
The toughest job you ’ ll ever love : A Pacific Northwest treatment workforce survey .
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment , 24 , 183–196 .
Gerhart , B .
( 1990 ) .
Voluntary turnover and alternative job opportuni- ties .
Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 75 , 467–476 .
Greenwald , A.G. , & Krieger , L.H .
( 2006 ) .
Implicit bias : Scientific foundations .
California Law Review , 94 , 945–967 .
Greenwald , A.G. , McGhee , D.E. , & Schwartz , J.K.L .
( 1998 ) .
Measur- ing individual differences in implicit cognition : The Implicit Association Test .
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 , 1464–1480 .
Kang , J. , & Banaji , M.R .
( 2006 ) .
Fair measures : A behavioral realist revision of ‘ ‘ affirmative action. ’ ’ California Law Review , 94 , 1063– 1118 .
Karpinski , A. , & Steinman , R.B .
( 2007 ) .
The Single Category Implicit Association Test as a measure of implicit social cognition .
Jour- nal of Personality and Social Psychology , 91 , 16–32 .
Maison , D. , Greenwald , A.G. , & Bruin , R.H. ( 2004 ) .
Predictive va- lidity of the Implicit Association Test in studies of brands , con- sumer attitudes and behavior .
Journal of Consumer Psychology , 14 , 405–415 .
Mitchell , P.G. , & Tetlock , P.E .
( in press ) .
Anti-discrimination law and the perils of mind reading .
The Ohio State University Law Review .
Poehlman , T.A. , Uhlmann , E. , Greenwald , A.G. , & Banaji , M.R .
( 2007 ) .
Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test : III .
Meta-analysis of predictive validity .
Manuscript submitted for pub- lication .
Preacher , K.J. , & Hayes , A.F .
( 2007 ) .
Asymptotic and resampling strat- egies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in simple and multiple mediator models .
Manuscript submitted for publication .
Price , J.L. , & Mueller , C.W .
( 1986 ) .
Handbook of organizational mea- surement .
Marshfield , MA : Pitman .
Richeson , J.A. , & Shelton , J.N .
( 2003 ) .
When prejudice doesn ’ t pay : Effects of interracial contact on executive function .
Psychological Science , 14 , 287–290 .
Sylvestre , D.L. , Litwin , A.H. , Clements , B.J. , & Gourevitch , M.N .
( 2005 ) .
The impact of barriers to hepatitis C virus treatment in recovering heroin users maintained on methadone .
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment , 29 , 159–165 .
Teachman , B. , & Woody , S. ( 2003 ) .
Automatic processing in spider phobia : Implicit fear associations over the course of treatment .
Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 112 , 100–109 .
Tetlock , P.E. , & Arkes , H. ( 2004 ) .
The implicit-prejudice exchange : Islands of consensus in a sea of controversy .
Psychological In- quiry , 15 , 311–321 .
Tetlock , P.E. , & Mitchell , G. ( in press ) .
Unconscious prejudice and accountability systems : What must organizations do to check im- plicit bias ?
Research in Organizational Behavior .
van Breukelen , W. , van der List , R. , & Steensma , H. ( 2004 ) .
Voluntary employee turnover : Combining variables from the ‘ traditional ’ turnover literature with the theory of planned behavior .
Journal of Organizational Behavior , 25 , 893–914 .
von Hippel , C. ( 2006 ) .
When people would rather switch than fight : Out-group favoritism among temporary employees .
Group Pro- cesses and Intergroup Relations , 9 , 533–546 .
( RECEIVED 5/13/07 ; REVISION ACCEPTED 8/7/07 ) Volume 19—Number 1 11 William von Hippel , Loren Brener , and Courtney von Hippel at UNIV OF MICHIGAN on March 5 , 2015pss.sagepub.comDownloaded from
