Eggebeen_JournMarFam_2009_VjlX.pdf
akN6HALrJuh9zem8A6AWbUZxKNTC-Eggebeen_JournMarFam_2009_VjlX.pdf.plain.html

DAVID EGGEBEEN The Pennsylvania State University JEFFREY DEW University of Virginia * The Role of Religion in Adolescence for Family Formation in Young Adulthood This paper examines the role of religion in ado- lescence for shaping subsequent family forma- tion .
Data were drawn from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health ( <SS> N ¼ 13,895 </SS> ) .
We explored the role of three dimen- sions of religious life—affiliation , attendance , and religious fervor—both singly and in combi- nation for the transition to either marriage or cohabitation .
Although each dimension pre- dicted subsequent union formation , it was the particular combination of these dimensions that was important for understanding the likelihood of cohabiting .
We also found evidence that pat- terns of religious identity , attendance , and fer- vor in adolescence were associated with the length of cohabitation , the likelihood of the cohabitation ending in marriage , and beliefs about the purpose of cohabitation .
Young adulthood is in themidst of a demographic revolution .
Delays in marriage , rising rates of cohabitation , high rates of nonmarital childbear- ing , and delays in marital births combined with changing patterns of schooling and work have meant that the movement into adulthood has become even less a predictable sequence of events that it once was ( Arnett , 2004 ; Settersten , Furstenberg , & Rumbaut , 2005 ) .
The purpose of this paper is to examine a potentially important factor in the changing landscape of young adult- hood : the role of earlier religious beliefs and behavior in shaping subsequent family formation choices .
The connections between religion and family life are receiving renewed attention from schol- ars .
Recent work has examined the role religious practices and beliefs play in parenting behavior ( Ellison , Bartkowski , & Segal , 1996 ; Wilcox , 1998 , 2004 ) , marriage ( Xu , Hudspeth , & Bartkowski , 2005 ) , intergenerational ties ( King & Elder , 1999 ; Pearce & Axinn , 1998 ) , and de- mographic behavior ( Lehrer , 2004 ; McQuillan , 2004 ) .
Scholars are finally turning their attention to the role of religion in the lives of adolescents and young adults .
Work by Smith ( 2003 , 2005 ) has clearly demonstrated the centrality , and the complexity , of religious beliefs for American adolescents .
Religious practices and beliefs also have been shown to powerfully shape adolescent sexual values and practices ( Regnerus , 2007 ) .
Finally , some recent work has begun to address the role of religion in the post-teenage years , when youth are laying the foundations for their subsequent adult lives bymaking decisions about romantic relationships , cohabitation , and mar- riage ( Arnett & Jensen , 2002 ; Thornton , Axinn , & Xie , 2007 ) .
There are limitations to a number of these recent studies of the religious influences on Department of Human Development and Family Studies , Population Research Institute , The Pennsylvania State University , 137 South Henderson Building , University Park , PA 16802 ( e5x @ psu.edu ) .
* Department of Sociology , University of Virginia , 542 Cabell Hall , P.O .
Box 400766 , Charlottesville , VA 22904- 4766 .
Key Words : adolescence , cohabitation , marriage , religion , young adulthood .
108 Journal of Marriage and Family 71 ( February 2009 ) : 108–121 family formation .
Most of these studies use sim- ple indicators of religion , focusing on one or two dimensions of religious experiences , or combine several dimensions into a single scale .
Where union formation patterns are the focus , data have mainly been drawn from older cohorts , reflecting a time period when religious influences may have been stronger ( Lehrer , 2000 ) .
Finally , with the exception of thework of Thornton and colleagues ( 2007 ) , none of these studies have gone beyond the initial transition to examine the effect of reli- gion on subsequent patterns of union stability or dissolution .
This paper addresses these gaps in the litera- ture .
Making use of the first and third Waves of the National Study of Adolescent Health ( Add- Health ) , we examine how three dimensions of religious beliefs and behavior in adolescence affect the likelihood of cohabitation andmarriage in young adulthood .
It is our contention that understanding the effects of religion on family formation behavior must consider the multidi- mensional nature of religiosity .
To fully under- stand how religious identity , the extent or importance of religious beliefs , and how often the person attends places of worship influence family formation choices , it is important to take into account not only the effect of each of these dimensions but also the interplay between them .
Specifically , we expect that adolescents who reg- ularly attend churches that emphasize the sanctity of marriage and whose beliefs are held to be very important are the most likely to make a transition to marriage and the least likely to make a transi- tion to cohabitation over the next 5 years , relative to other combinations of religious beliefs and experiences .
We also examine how religious behavior and beliefs in adolescence , as measured in these three dimensions , might be related to specific patterns of cohabitation experiences .
Previous work has demonstrated that religious identity and religios- ity reduce the odds of the first union being cohab- itation ( Lehrer , 2004 ) .
Nevertheless , a significant proportion of religiously inclined youth still choose to cohabit ( Thornton et al. , 2007 ) .
There has been little exploration of whether early reli- gious experiences shape subsequent patterns of cohabitation .
We anticipate that the particular combinations of religious identity , attendance , and fervor in adolescence aremore likely be asso- ciated with briefer spells of cohabitation that are more likely to end in amarriage and be associated with the view that cohabitation without marriage in mind is unacceptable .
Put another way , cohab- iting young adults who were regularly attending churches as teenagers with distinctive teachings about marriage and cohabitation and whose reli- gious beliefs as teens were very important are substantially more likely to use cohabitation as part of the marriage formation process .
RELIGION AND THE FORMATION OF INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS How might the religious life of teenagers affect their subsequent union formation ?
At the most general level , Smith ( 2003 ) identifies nine possi- ble sources of religious influences on adoles- cents , which combine into three domains : moral order , learned competencies , and social and orga- nizational ties .
Of particular interest for us in this paper is the moral order .
Smith ( 2003 ) notes that religion can promote ‘ ‘ specific cultural moral di- rectives of self-control and personal virtue grounded in the authority of long historical tradi- tions and narratives , into which members are in- ducted , such that youths may internalize these moral orders and use them to guide their life choices and moral commitments ’ ’ ( p. 20 ) .
These can be accomplished , according to Smith ( 2003 ) , through moral directives , spiritual experiences , and role modeling .
In this paper we identify three dimensions of religious experience as reported by the adolescent that approximate several dimensionsof the cultural moral order : the denominational identity—and thus , after a fashion , the particular teachings about marriage ; the pattern of exposure to these teach- ings as measured by church attendance ; and the relative importance of religion to the youth as indi- cated by their self-report of the importance of their beliefs and as well how often they engage in pri- vate religious practices like prayer .
Religious Identity Particular religions , religious bodies , or religious leaders can have a direct effect on decisions about marriage or cohabitation by their doctrines or their teaching , and there are distinct differences among denominations in their teachings or emphasis , or both , on marriage .
Mormons and Evangelical Protestants have strongly advocated marriage as God ’ s design for intimate relation- ships and that marriage , as a sacred institution , is the cornerstone of family life ( Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints , 2004 ; Dobson , 2004 ; Teenage Religiosity and Future Family Formation 109 Southern Baptist Resolutions , 2004 ) .
As a result , Evangelical Christians and Mormons have con- sistently discouraged premarital sex and cohabi- tation and encouraged marriage ( Heaton , 1992 ) .
Of course conservative denominations may not uniformly ‘ ‘ practice what they preach. ’ ’ Chaves ( 1997 ) notes , for example , that public stances of particular religious bodies are often only loosely coupled to concrete practices .
Support for this observation come from an analysis of family pro- gramming practices of various religious tradi- tions where the most conservative religious traditions ( Conservative Protestant and Catholic ) were no more likely than more liberal denomina- tions to be offering traditional family program- ming ( Wilcox , Chaves , & Franz , 2004 ) .
Nevertheless , there is empirical evidence that Conservative Protestants and Mormons are sig- nificantly more likely to marry and less likely to cohabit than other types denominational affi- liations ( Lehrer , 2000 , 2004 ; Xu et al. , 2005 ) .
Identifying with a Conservative Protestant denomination may also influence union forma- tion indirectly by affecting choices in other do- mains that influence the likelihood and timing of marriage .
For example , some research shows that Mainline Protestants have higher levels of educational attainment than Conservative Protes- tants ( Lehrer , 2000 ) .
The relatively low priority Conservative Protestants give formal education has been linked with their comparatively early age at marriage ( Darnell & Sherkat , 1997 ) .
Sim- ilarly , the strong emphasis on high fertility among Mormons predisposes individuals to con- sider early marriage ( Heaton , 1986 ) .
We hypoth- esize , then , that adolescents whose religious identity or affiliation is Conservative Protestant are more likely to marry and less likely to cohabit in young adulthood .
In a similar fashion , the Roman Catholic Church is ‘ ‘ promarriage ’ ’ in its theology and teach- ings .
It has long held that marriage is a sacrament and that sexual behavior is only appropriatewithin marriage ( Ellingson , Van Haitsma , Lauman , & Tebbe , 2004 ; U.S. Catholic Conference , 1977 ) .
Some research , however , suggests that Catholics ’ behavior is less consistent or predictable than one would expect given the Church ’ s emphasis on marriage .
Although Catholic adolescents are less likely than Evangelical Protestant adolescents to be sexually active , a sizable minority end their teenage years as nonvirgins ( Regnerus , 2007 ) .
Several studies have also found that Catholics are less likely than Conservative Protestants or Mormons to enter marriage early ( Lehrer , 2004 ; Xu et al. , 2005 ) .
Why do Catholics seemingly avoid marriage despite the strong pro-marriage emphasis of their faith ?
Lehrer ( 2004 ) observes that , compared to other faiths , the costs of divorce for Catholics are particularly high .
These higher costs , she suggests , may lead to a greater hesi- tancy to enter into marriage quickly .
Consistent with this idea , she finds evidence that Catholics tend to enter marriage at an intermediate age , avoiding both early and late marriage .
Given this , we expect that Catholic youth will be less likely than Conservative Protestants to marry but equally likely to avoid cohabitation .
In contrast to Evangelicals , Mormons , and Catholics , Protestants from the mainline de- nominations have become increasingly distinc- tive in their teachings .
While continuing to emphasize the importance of strong and vital family relationships , Mainline Protestants have put less emphasis on restrictive teachings con- cerning sex outside of marriage , been more toler- ant of divorce , and have been more accepting of alternatives to the traditional family than Evan- gelical Protestants ( Edgell , 2005 ; Hargrove , 1983 ) .
The higher levels of educational attain- ment among Mainline Protestants might also be associated with delays in marriage ( Lehrer , 2000 ) .
Given this , we might expect to find that youth from Mainline Protestant backgrounds are less likely than Conservative Protestants to marry but more likely to cohabit .
In contrast to youth who identify with a reli- gious tradition , those with no religious affiliation are not as likely to be exposed to a compelling vision of how to behave when it comes to mar- riage and cohabitation .
Consistent with what others have found , we expect these youths to be the least likely to marry and the most likely to cohabit ( Thornton et al. , 2007 ) .
Attendance Religious identity is far from the whole story , however .
For the particular beliefs and teachings of a religious group to exert an influence , individ- uals must be exposed to these messages .
Most typically this means they must attend religious services .
We should expect then that the more teenagers attend services or participate in church related ministries like young groups or youth services , or both , the more likely , all things being equal , they are likely to hear and absorb teachings about what is appropriate sexual behavior , what 110 Journal of Marriage and Family are appropriateways to conduct intimate relation- ships , and the meaning and purpose of marriage .
Of course , the relationship between church atten- dance and behavior is more complicated for ado- lescents than adults .
As some scholars have noted , adolescent attendance at religious services may reflect the expectations or pressure from parents or the momentum of long-standing habit , rather than an authentic desire to worship God or understand and follow church teachings ( Regnerus , 2007 ; Smith , 2005 ) .
Nevertheless , a number of studies find that church attendance remains a significant predictor of youth behavior ( Regnerus ; Regnerus & Elder , 2003 ) .
We hy- pothesize that church attendance will be posi- tively related to the likelihood of marriage and negatively related to the likelihood of cohabiting .
The Importance of Religious Beliefs A third dimension of religion that has consequen- ces for subsequent marriage and cohabitation among youth is that of the importance they place on their beliefs .
The messages , beliefs , and doc- trines they are exposed to must be meaningful to them ; they must take their religion seriously .
Wimberley ( 1989 ) argues that religious identity includes both norm adherence and identity salience .
Religious norm adherence includes such publicly visible aspects of religious experi- ence as church attendance and knowledge of church tenets or doctrine .
Religious salience , on the other hand , is the internal aspects of religious experience—private religion—and ‘ ‘ concerns the extent to which the religious identity is dom- inant among other identities that make up the self ’ ’ ( Wimberley , p. 130 ) .
In part , salience is measured by how important individuals say their religion is to them .
Salience , however , is also anchored in the extent to which individuals prac- tice their beliefs apart from extrinsic motivations .
This could mean the extent to which they engage in private religious practices like prayer , medita- tion , or scripture reading .
It could also mean the extent to which their identity as a religious adher- ent ‘ ‘ wins out ’ ’ over competing identities ( e.g. , macho football player ) for influencing sexual behavior , for example ( Regnerus , 2007 ) .
Norm adherence does not necessarily lead to salience .
An adolescent might be knowledgeable about Catholic teaching on marriage and sexuality and may regularly attend Mass , but these activities may say little about the extent to which the ado- lescent ‘ ‘ takes his Catholicism to heart ’ ’ when it comes to making decisions about sexual behav- ior .
On the other hand , Regnerus argues , high salience can act as a ‘ ‘ stimulant to religious be- liefs or cognitive structures , a light switch of sorts that turns on the force of religious belief ’ ’ ( p. 48 ) .
We hypothesize that the greater the importance of religion to the adolescent , the greater the likeli- hood of marriage and lower the likelihood of cohabitation .
The Interplay Between Identity , Attendance , and Salience Thus far we have argued that religiosity is multi- dimensional , and that each of these components independently affects family formation behavior .
It is , however , how these three dimensions inter- act together that may tell us more about how reli- gion influences subsequent behavior .
Put another way , the ‘ ‘ punch ’ ’ of religion on future marriage or cohabitation ismuchmore powerfulwhen ado- lescents identify themselves as members of a par- ticular church with distinctive teachings about marriage , and they are regularly attending church services or youth groups , and their religious be- liefs are important to them .
Most of the research that has attempted to link religion and family behavior has focused on affil- iation , attendance , or religiosity , but rarely more than one of these dimensions .
One exception is the work of Lehrer ( 2004 ) , who examined the interaction between two of these dimensions : religious affiliation ( Mainline Protestants , Con- servative Protestants , and Catholics ) and reli- gious attendance at age 14 .
She found that patterns of entry into marriage do not vary signif- icantly by frequency of attendance at services for any of the three religious groups .
She did , how- ever , find evidence of an interaction between affiliation and attendance when it came to cohab- itation , with high attending Conservative Protes- tants the least likely to cohabit .
Recent work by Thornton et al .
( 2007 ) identified three dimensions of religiosity in a fashion similar to what is pro- posed in this paper ; distinguish between affilia- tion ( Catholic , Nonfundamentalist Protestant , Fundamentalist Protestant or Baptist , other , and none ) , and two dimensions of religiosity—parti- cipation and importance .
Interestingly , contrary to what they had expected , they found no evi- dence that the effects of participation and impor- tance on likelihood of cohabitation or marriage varied significantly between these religious groups .
These findings , however , were based on Teenage Religiosity and Future Family Formation 111 a sample of heavily Catholic respondents from the Detroit metropolitan area who entered young adulthood around 1980 , making generalizations difficult ( Pearce & Thornton , 2007 ; Thornton et al. , 2007 ) .
Given the above considerations , we anticipate several patterns in the interplay between affilia- tion , attendance , and salience .
We expect to find that variations in attendance and fervor will pre- dict differences within denominations in the likelihood of marriage or cohabitation .
We also expect that the differences between denomi- nations in the likelihood of marriage and co- habitation will be considerably moderated by differences in attendance and fervor .
Specifically , we expect that adolescents who identify them- selves as Conservative Protestants who regularly attend worship services or youth groups and who report their beliefs are very important will be sig- nificantly more likely than other Conservative Protestant adolescents to marry and will be sig- nificantly less likely to cohabit .
Furthermore , we anticipate that these adolescents ( high attend- ing , high salience , Conservative Protestants ) will the most likely of all the groups to marry and the least likely to cohabit .
We also expect Mainline Protestant and Catholic youths to be less likely to marry than Conservative Protestant youth ( for the different reasons outlined above ) regard- less of their level of attendance or fervor .
We expect , however , that the likelihood of cohabita- tion among Mainline Protestant and Catholic youth to be lowest among those who frequently attend religious services and for whom religion is important—although less than that of high attending , high fervor Conservative Protestant youths .
In sum , we anticipate that religious iden- tity , attendance at religious services , and fervor , separately and in concert , should affect union formation .
Religion and the Nature of Cohabitation One of the earliest questions in the research liter- ature on cohabitation in the United States revolved around whether the explosive growth of cohabitation in the 1970s and 1980s repre- sented an emerging stage in the courtship process or a substitute for marriage ( Smock , 2000 ) .
More recent work suggests that both types of cohabita- tions are practiced today in the United States ( Casper & Bianchi , 2002 ; Smock & Manning , 2004 ) .
A significant fraction of cohabiting cou- ples end up marrying , but there are also a number of cohabiting unions where the individuals indi- cated they have no desire to marry , that are of long duration , or that are settings for bearing and rearing children ( Brown & Booth , 1996 ; Bumpass & Lu , 2000 ) .What factorsmight differ- entiate between these two types of cohabitations has not received much attention beyond basic demographic characteristics such as race or socioeconomic status ( Blackwell & Lichter , 2000 ; Smock , 2000 ) .
What role might religion play in the expectations or meaning of a cohabit- ing experience ?
One possibility is that adolescent religion has little or no effect on the course of cohabitation in young adulthood .
Given the strong prohibition against nonmarital cohabitation among Conser- vative Protestants and Catholics , the effect of this particular religious background on current behavior may be small , once an individual has made the choice to cohabit .
That is , once an indi- vidual has ‘ ‘ fallen away , ’ ’ the movement away from a religiously based lifestyle may be quite far .
We do know , for example , that once individ- uals cohabit , their religious behavior declines ( Thornton , Axinn , & Hill , 1992 ) .
If this dynamic is common , we would expect few differences by adolescent religious experiences on the likeli- hood of the cohabitation ending in marriage , views on the meaning of cohabitation , or the length of first cohabiting spell .
An alternative possibility builds on the idea that religion in general , apart from any particular doctrines or teachings , tends to be correlated with conventional beliefs and lifestyles ( Mahoney et al. , 1999 ) .
Although this conventionalization process is likely to select many individuals into marriage rather than cohabitation as a first union , it may also have an effect on those who subse- quently cohabit as well .
Thus cohabiting young adults with some religious roots ( regardless of specific identity , attendance , or fervor ) are likely to view cohabitation as most appropriate if it points to marriage and treat their own cohabiting experiences accordingly .
If religious convention- alization is the predominant pattern , we would expect to find no differences among the various combinations of identities , fervor , and atten- dance .
The major difference in cohabitation pat- terns , then , is between those who indicate no religious preference in adolescence , relative to all the others .
A third possibility is that particular religious beliefs and behavior evident in childhood and adolescence continue to have an effect into 112 Journal of Marriage and Family young adulthood .
Specifically , youth who faith- fully attended Conservative Protestant or Catho- lic churches and who indicated their beliefs are important—a pattern that we hypothesize should exert the most influence on subsequent family formation behavior—are more likely than other young adults with differing identities , atten- dance , and levels of fervor to conduct their sub- sequent cohabitation as if it were part of the courtship process .
If this pattern predominates , we would expect to find that cohabiting young adults who were devout , high attending Conser- vative Protestants or Catholics as adolescents have shorter spells of cohabitation , have higher odds of exiting those cohabitations into mar- riage , and are more likely to hold to the value that cohabitation is most appropriately done with marriage in mind .
In sum , we propose three competing hypothe- ses about the link between adolescent religious experiences and subsequent cohabitation pat- terns : ( a ) Religious experiences will have no effect on patterns and beliefs about cohabitation ; ( b ) all religious experiences in adolescence will be associated with shorter cohabitation spells that most likely end in marriage as well as the belief that cohabitation should end in marriage ; or ( c ) only those adolescents who were Catholic or Conservative Protestant youth who attended reg- ularly andwhose beliefswere importantwill have shorter cohabiting spells that typically end in marriage and believe that cohabitation should end in marriage .
METHOD Data The data for this study were drawn from the first and third waves of the National Study of Adoles- cent Health .
TheAdd-Health survey is a longitu- dinal nationally representative sample of <SS> 20,745 </SS> middle and high school students first inter- viewed in 1995 – 1996 .
A second wave of inter- views was conducted 1 year later , and a third round of 15,170 persons was interviewed in 2001 .
Response rates for Waves 1 and 3 were 78.9 % and 77.4 % , respectively .
Attrition ana- lyses suggest that the effect of nonresponse on representativeness was minimal ( Chantala , Kalsbeek , & Andraca , 2004 ) .
We restricted the sample to respondents who participated in both Waves 1 and 3 , who had not been in a cohabiting or marriage union prior to the first survey , and who gave information on their religious affilia- tion at Wave 1 , for a final sample of <SS> 13,895 </SS> .
The analyses in this study were all weighted using the Wave 3 weights , adjusting the sample to be nationally representative .
A more detailed description of the data can be found in Harris et al .
( 2003 ) .
Measures Religion .
We measured three dimensions of reli- gious beliefs and behaviors : religious affiliation or identity , fervor or devoutness , and religious attendance .
In Wave 1 , respondents were asked to identify their particular denominational affilia- tion ( e.g. , Adventist , Assemblies of God ) .
We re- coded these 29 choices into five categories : No religious affiliation , Conservative Protestant , Mainline Protestant , Catholic , and Other , using a classification scheme derived from two sources : the RELTRADmethod of classifying denomina- tions described in Steensland et al .
( 2000 ) and a scheme used by Smith ( 2005 ) .
These schemes allowed us to categorize specific denominations into groups that share a common underlying theo- logical or doctrinal similarity when it comes to perspectives on marriage and sexual behavior .
Catholics are distinguished because of their size ( they represent 22 % of the sample ) .
All other reli- gious or denominational affiliations that could not be classified into the above three groups are lumped together in the ‘ ‘ other ’ ’ category ( 4 % ) .
Regrettably , wewere not able to distinguishMus- lims ( <SS> n ¼ 33 </SS> ) or Jews ( <SS> n ¼ 108 </SS> ) in these analy- ses , given their small sample sizes .
Finally , about 14 % of the respondents indicated they had no religious identify or affiliation , and were classified as ‘ ‘ none. ’ ’ Two Wave 1 questions were used to construct our measure of religious fervor : ‘ ‘ How important is religion to you ? ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ How often do you pray ? ’ ’ Responses were combined to form a scale ranging from 2 to 9 ( mean 6.54 ) , with higher scores indicating higher fervor or religiosity .
Chronbach ’ s alpha for this scale was .75 , indicat- ing that combining measures of belief and prac- tice makes reasonable empirical as well as theoretical sense .
The third dimension of religion we employed was worship service attendance .
Attendance was drawn from theWave 1 question : ‘ ‘ In the past twelve months , how often did you attend reli- gious services ? ’ ’ Answers ranged from 1 ( once a week or more ) to 4 ( never ) .
This variable was Teenage Religiosity and Future Family Formation 113 reverse coded , such that higher values indicated greater attendance .
We also created a composite variable with cat- egories that represent combinations of affiliation , high and low fervor , and high and low atten- dance .
Utilizing a mean split on fervor , individu- als with a score of 7 or above were coded as being in the high group for this variable , and those below 7 had low fervor .
Similarly , individuals who attended worship services more than once per month ( a score of 3 or 4 ) were put in the high attendance group and individuals who attended once per month or less were in the low attendance group .
Thus , we divided Conservative Protes- tants into four groups : those with high attendance and high fervor , those with low attendance and high fervor , those with high attendance and low fervor , and those with both low attendance and low fervor .
We divided Catholics and Mainline Protestants in the same fashion.We did not divide respondents who are in the ‘ ‘ other ’ ’ or ‘ ‘ none ’ ’ affiliation categories .
There were too few re- spondents in the ‘ ‘ other ’ ’ affiliation category to divide into four groups , and those who had no religious affiliation have virtually no distribution on the attendance and fervor variables .
Religious identity , attendance , and fervor are combined into a composite variable with 16 categories .
Other independent variables .
Other Wave 1 var- iables included in the multivariate models were age ( measured in years ) , race ( EuropeanAmerican , African American , Hispanic American , Other ) , total family income , mother ’ s education ( less than high school , high school graduate , some col- lege , and college graduate ) , region of resident at Wave 1 ( South , non-South ) , respondent ’ s educa- tion as of Wave 3 ( less than high school , high school graduate , some college , and college grad- uate ) , family structure ( two-parent biological , two-parent stepfamily , single mother , single father , and other ) , and gender .
Descriptive statis- tics of these and the key independent variables are displayed in Table 1 .
Dependent variables .
The key dependent vari- able for the analyses in Tables 2 through 4 is the transition to first union , defined here is as either marriage or cohabitation .
The Wave 3 questionnaire collected cohabitation and mar- riage histories , from which we were able to determine the timing and type of union transi- tion for the respondents .
By Wave 3 , 9.6 % ( 1,436 ) of respondents hadmarriage be their first union transition , 39.0 % ( 5,223 ) had cohabita- tion as a first union , and 51.5 % ( 7,236 ) had no union transition .
Participants ’ attitudes on the acceptability of cohabitation without plans to marry ( Table 5 ) were measured at Wave 3 with the following question : ‘ ‘ How much do you agree or disagree with the statement ‘ It is all right for an unmarried couple to live together even if theyaren ’ t interested Table 1 .
Descriptive Statistics Variable Mean or Proportion SD Range Age 22.18 1.84 18 – 28 Gender ( 1 ¼ male , 2 ¼ female ) .49 Mother ’ s education Less than high school a .15 High school graduate .33 Some college .29 College graduate .23 Family income b 45.78 39.00 0 – 999 Family structure Two-parent , biological a .58 Two-parent , nonbiological .14 Mother only .19 Father only .03 Other structure .05 Race/ethnicity European American .68 African-American .16 Hispanic .07 Other .10 Region of residence ( 1 ¼ South ) .39 Respondent ’ s education Less than high school .15 High school graduate .33 Some college .40 College graduate .12 Religious affiliation None .13 Conservative Protestant a .33 Mainline Protestant .24 Catholic .24 Other .05 Religious attendance Worship service attendance 2.71 1.17 1 – 4 Religious fervor 6.55 2.38 2 – 9 Acceptability of cohabitation without marriage plans c 3.77 1.14 1 – 5 Note : <SS> N ¼ 13,895 </SS>
