Eskine_JournExpSocPsych_2013_QBm.pdf
aZQO3sZhMxBpyVbkFD.6j9riel1O-Eskine_JournExpSocPsych_2013_QBm.pdf.plain.html

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 947–950 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Journal of Experimental Social Psychology j ourna l homepage : www.e lsev ie r .com/ locate / jespFlashReport Moral contagion effects in everyday interpersonal encounters Kendall J. Eskine ⁎ , Ashley Novreske 1 , Michelle Richards 1 Loyola University New Orleans , USA H I G H L I G H T S • Contact with moral transgressors induces experiences of immorality ( i.e. , guilt ) .
• Moral contagion can occur through indirect and direct interpersonal contact .
• Moral contagion is moderated by disgust sensitivity.⁎ Corresponding author at : Loyola University , 6363 S Department of Psychological Sciences , New Orleans , LA E-mail address : kjeskine @ loyno.edu ( K.J .
Eskine ) .
1 These authors have equal contributions .
0022-1031/ $ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2013.04.009a b s t r a c ta r t i c l e i n f oArticle history : Received 14 March 2013 Revised 14 April 2013 Available online 23 April 2013 Keywords : Contagion Morality Disgust sensitivity Magical thinking Purity metaphorsAre people 's essences fully restricted to their physical forms , or can residues of their perceived character be transmitted to others by mere physical contact ?
The present research investigated the interpersonal effects of contagion in the context of immoral behavior .
The findings from two experiments revealed that after participants came into both indirect and direct physical contact with amoral transgressor , they experiencedmore state guilt .
Further , the effectwasmoderated by disgust sensitivity— namely , after touching an unethical person , thosewith high disgust sensitivity reported more guilt than those with low disgust sensitivity .
This is the first research to demonstrate that physical contact with a morally tainted person can affect one 's own immorality ( i.e. , guilt ) and hence provides evidence for “ moral transfer. ” These findings further highlight disgust sensitivity as an important mechanism undergirding psychological contagion .
Implications for daily life and directions for future research are discussed .
© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Introduction Literally speaking , people are touchy.We shake hands to greet others , indicate respect , and conclude deals ; hug to express interpersonal warmth and other emotions ; and pat others ' backs to congratulate or console .
But can these incidental and seemingly innocuous encounters transfer unintentional information ?
For example , can moral transgres- sors contaminate inanimate objects and transfer immoral residue onto others ?
The present experiments tested the extent to which ( perceived ) moral essences in others are physically contagious .
Rozin and Nemeroff ( 1990 ) outlined magical thinking and one of its underlying laws : psychological contagion .
According to their view , “ essences ” can be passed between people and objects , wherein “ one ob- ject , usually of an animate nature , is a source ; the second object , usually human , is a target ” ( p. 206 ) .
For example , it has been observed that stu- dents will wear their brilliant romantic partners ' sweatshirts while tak- ing exams in order to enhance their own performance ( Albas & Albas , 1989 ; Rushowy , 2000 ) .
In this case , one partner 's academic brillianceaint Charles Avenue , Box 194 , 70118 , USA .
rights reserved .
( an animate source domain ) is first passed to the sweatshirt .
Second , the sweatshirt itself can now be used to transfer one partner 's academic essence to the other partner ( the target domain ) .While people seem to possess folk intuitions about contagion , can these beliefs meaningfully affect their judgments and behaviors ?
Some of the first empirical studies on contagion revealed a number of striking findings that helped establish its characteristics and parame- ters ( Nemeroff , Brinkman , & Woodward , 1994 ; Rozin , Markwith , & Nemeroff , 1992 ) .
For example , students preferred sweaters owned , but never worn , by someone with AIDS over sweaters worn , but never owned , by someone with AIDS , even though both sweaters had been washed .
Further , these effects were not degraded by time .
Silverware used by someone with AIDS is as contaminated 1 year later as it is 1 day later , and this contamination is not dependent on any particular part of the body ; fingernails , locks of hair , elbows , etc .
are all vehicles for contagion ( Nemeroff et al. , 1994 ; Rozin et al. , 1992 ) .
Likewise , conta- gion has an enduring temporal quality .
Participants are nearly as disin- clined towards sweaters worn by people with AIDS for 5 minutes ( then washed ) as those worn for an entire year ( then washed ) .
Thus , the results indicate that psychological contagion requires physical contact , is essentially permanent between source and target domains , is holographic ( fingernails are as contagious as other body parts ) , and is insensitive to dosage ( 5 minutes ≈ 1 year ) .
948 K.J .
Eskine et al .
/ Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 947–950The origins and functions of contagion have also received consider- able treatment .
Nemeroff and Rozin ( 1994 ) argue that “ magical thinking might simply be an inevitable result of human development .
A principle like “ contact causes influence ” might be learned from very early experi- ences , beginning with the infant 's perception that his own grasping , pulling , pushing , and so on have influence on objects… ” ( p. 160 ) .
They also contend that contagion has adaptive functions rooted in biological instincts to protect oneself against “ microbial contamination ” ( p. 161 ) .
On their view , contagion provides a mechanism through which people can defend themselves against unwanted foreign substances .
A biologically-oriented view is corroborated by evidence that people are hesitant to come into contact with actual contaminants like feces or articles of clothing saturated with disease .
However , people still feel reluctant towards objects that simply resemble undesirable objects .
For example , in some of the earliest research on magical thinking , Rozin , Millman , and Nemeroff ( 1986 ) observed that students indicated reservations towards chocolate fudge shaped like “ dog doo ” relative to round-shaped fudge , fake vomit over similarly sized rubber sink stoppers , and sugar labeled as “ cyanide ” over regularly labeled sugar .
( Importantly , students themselves actually labeled the container of sugar as cyanide and therefore knew it was actual sugar . )
Put simply , the similarity between these objects influenced students ' experiences of them .
As Nemeroff and Rozin ( 1994 ) pointed out , this occurrence is especially puzzling in contagion situations where people know that the “ contaminated ” objects have been thoroughly sanitized .
Consider another set of findings .
As in previous work , Rozin , Markwith , and McCauley ( 1994 ) found that students reported reluctance to wear sweaters previously worn ( but washed ) by people with AIDS or tuberculosis when compared to new sweaters .
But what about conta- gion situations that do not involve microbial contamination ?
In their research , this effect was also found for a morally tainted target ( a convicted murderer ) .
Rozin et al .
( 1994 ) explained these findings from a cross-cultural perspective by showing how many descriptions of physical illnesses implicate moral glitches in some form or another .
Additional findings frommoral psychology , neuroscience , and grounded cognition have further revealed that physical and moral disgust are indeed represented and processed with considerable cognitive and physiological overlap ( Chapman , Kim , Susskind , & Anderson , 2009 ; Eskine , Kacinik , & Prinz , 2011 ) .
Indeed , one line of research spotlights the relationship between moral transgressions and participants ' desires for cleansing products , suggesting that immoral behavior lends itself to physical contamination and hence leads people to seek physical puri- fication ( Lee & Schwarz , 2010 , but see also Schnall , Benton , & Harvey , 2008 ; Zhong , Strejcek , & Sivanathan , 2010 ) .
The extant research has produced many exciting findings that bear on people 's relationships with themselves and objects .
Although the interpersonal consequences of psychological contagion have been explored less frequently , they offer important implications for social life given the amount of indirect physical contact ( shared use of objects ) and direct physical contact ( handshakes ) people generally experience .
Thus , the present research investigated psychological contagion via both types of interpersonal contact .
It was hypothesized that indirect and direct physical contact with a moral transgressor would increase participants ' state guilt .
Since the existing literature has focused mainly on aversion to contagion events , the present research 's major contribution is that it measures actual guilt .
Recall that Rozin et al .
( 1994 ) observed that peo- ple were disinclined to touch something that had been morally tainted .
However , no research to date has shown that contact with such objects results in an actual experience of immorality ( moral guilt ) .
Therefore , this research represents the first empirical demonstration that moral contagion that occurs via direct or indirect physical contact with trans- gressors affects others ' personal moral emotions , which can be consid- ered a kind of “ moral transfer. ” <SD> Study 1 </SD> All participants were recruited from Loyola 's psychology department participant pool and received course credit for their efforts .
Upon enter- ing the experimental room , <SS> 54 </SS> participants ( <SS> 38 </SS> females , Mage = 19.76 ) were told that some students were recently caught stealing supplies out of the lab .
However , in the contagion condition , participants received the added description that the transgressors were found previously sitting in the same chairs as the current participants .
All participants then completed a “ personality inventory , ” which assessed state guilt , sadness , and anger , among other filler items , that measured how they were feeling “ right at this moment ” on a scale ranging from 1 ( not at all ) to 7 ( very much ) ( Marschall , Sanftner , & Tangney , 1994 ) .
Fifteen items assessed state guilt ( e.g. , “ I feel bad about something I have done ” and “ I feel like apologizing , confessing ” ) , which were averaged into a single index ( Cronbach 's α = .906 ) .
Results showed that those who sat in the same chairs as the previous transgressors experienced significantly more guilt ( M = 2.82 , SD = .66 , n = 27 ) than those in the control condition ( M = 2.28 , SD = .77 , n = 27 ) , t ( 52 ) = -2.77 , <PV> p = .008 </PV> , d = .75 .
To show discriminant validity , we performed sepa- rate <TN> t-tests </TN> on other negative emotions ( sadness and anger ) , with results giving null effects , ps = ns .
These findings revealed that the perceived moral essence of the target was indeed contagious and thus physically transferable to participants , but only in the context of guilt and not other negative emotions , which suggests moral transfer .
<SD> Study 2 </SD> <SD> Study 1 </SD> found that perceived moral essences are indirectly conta- gious .
To replicate and extend these findings to direct physical contact , <SS> 48 </SS> participants ( <SS> 32 </SS> females , Mage = 20.15 ) were randomly assigned to wear a rubber glove ( n = 26 ) or simply look at a glove ( n = 22 ) while they evaluated it for an ostensible consumer rating study .
The glovema- nipulation was used to provide a physical barrier between participants ' skin and an unethical individual to be described momentarily .
While participants were wearing their gloves ( or not ) during the consumer rating portion of the study , a confederate entered the room and intro- duced himself as running for student government .
He apologized for interrupting the session and proceeded to shake everyone 's hand in the room as he asked for their support for his candidacy .
After the candidate left the room , a second confederate ( the research assistant who was helping the experimenter administer materials ) explained to the participants that this student was known to cheat on his exams , plagiarize his essays , and lie to both faculty and students to enhance his credentials .
All participants then completed the same personality inventory as in <SD> Study 1 </SD> but with an added measure of disgust sensitivity ( Haidt , McCauley , & Rozin , 1994 , modified by Olatunji et al. , 2007 ) , which we hypothesized to be a potential underlying mechanism of contagion .
To this end , recent research has shown that high disgust-sensitive individ- uals are better at detecting physical impurity low disgust-sensitive indi- viduals ( Sherman , Haidt , & Clore , 2012 ) , and hence we predicted that high disgust-sensitive participants would be more likely to experience psychological contagion effects than low disgust-sensitive participants .
We regressed state guilt on one categorical predictor ( glove vs. bare hand ) , one continuous predictor ( disgust sensitivity ) , and their interaction .
Using a two-step model that first tests the two main effects and then adds the interaction term in the second step , results re- vealed amain effect of the glove/hand condition ( b = 1.076 , SE = .170 , <PV> p b .001 </PV> ) and , more critically , an interaction ( b = .634 , SE = .222 , <PV> p = .006 </PV> , see Fig .
1 ) , indicating that the relationship between the glove/hand condition and state guilt depended on one 's disgust sensi- tivity .
Second , we tested the simple slopes between high- and low- disgust participants ( see Aiken & West , 1991 ) .
Results showed that while the low-disgust participants showed the effect ( b = .301 , SE = .115 , <PV> p = .012 </PV> ) , it was stronger in high-disgust participants Fig .
1 .
Participants ' mean state guilt scores as a function of the glove/hand manipulation ( categorical ) and mean-centered disgust sensitivity ( continuous ) .
949K.J .
Eskine et al .
/ Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 947–950 ( b = .757 , SE = .110 , <PV> p b .001 </PV> ) , thus further confirming the hypothesis that disgust sensitivitymoderates contagion effects .
As in <SD> Study 1 </SD>
