Ganesan_JournMarketRes_2010_yNdm.pdf
a2DpbGXS.n_XDRPd8NcSeIm_hndi-Ganesan_JournMarketRes_2010_yNdm.pdf.plain.html

*Shankar Ganesan is Office Depot Professor of Marketing, Eller College of Management, University of Arizona (e-mail: sganesan@eller.arizona. edu). Steven P. Brown is Bauer Professor of Marketing, C.T. Bauer College of Business, University of Houston (e-mail: steve.brown@mail.uh.edu). Babu John Mariadoss is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Department of Marketing, Washington State University (e-mail: bjohnmar@wsu.edu). Hillbun (Dixon) Ho is an assistant professor, Division of Marketing and International Business, Nanyang Business School, Nanyang Technological University (e-mail: dixonho@ntu.edu.sg). The authors thank the Institute for the Study of Business Markets (ISBM) at Pennsylvania State Univer- sity for generously funding this research. This research also benefited from the helpful comments of Ed Blair, Narayan Janakiraman, Aric Rindfleisch, Fred Webster, and Bart Weitz. Jan Heide served as associate editor for this article. SHANKAR GANESAN, STEVEN P. BROWN, BABU JOHN MARIADOSS, and HILLBUN (DIXON) HO* Using an assimilation and contrast framework, the authors assess the buffering and amplifying effects of relationship commitment on organizational buyers’ intentions to switch suppliers when a relationship is strained by the incumbent’s own misbehavior. The results of three studies show that both calculative and affective commitment buffer incumbent suppliers against minor incidences of their own misbehavior but that affective commitment also reliably amplifies the adverse effects of an incumbent supplier’s flagrant opportunism. Process tests indicate that buyer perceptions of supplier conformance to normative standards account for (completely mediate) the observed buffering and amplifi- cation effects in a manner consistent with the underlying assimilation and contrast framework. Keywords: relationship commitment, business-to-business relationships, buffering and amplifying effects, opportunism and ethical violations, assimilations and contrast Buffering and Amplifying Effects of Relationship Commitment in Business-to- Business Relationships © 2010, American Marketing Association ISSN: 0022-2437 (print), 1547-7193 (electronic) 361 Journal of Marketing Research Vol. XLVII (April 2010), 361-373 Commitment between buyers and sellers has been well established as a crucial factor in relationship development and continuity (Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987; Morgan and Hunt 1994). Research has shown that relationship commit- ment has many benefits, including reducing uncertainty, increasing exchange efficiency and satisfaction, and enhancing performance and profitability (e.g., Anderson and Weitz 1992; Brown, Lusch, and Nicholson 1995; Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987; Lusch and Brown 1996). Even so, several studies (e.g., Anderson and Jap 2005; Grayson and Ambler 1999; Hess, Ganesan, and Klein 2003) have investigated a “dark side” of close relationships. The current research explores both the benefits (buffering effects) and the dark side (amplification effects) of commitment to business-to-business relationships and makes theoretically grounded predictions regarding conditions under which each type of effect occurs. We report three studies using an assimilation and contrast framework in which we predict and find systematic buffering (assimilation) and amplifying (contrast) effects of commitment on threats to relationships posed by supplier misbehavior (unethical behavior and opportunism). Incumbent suppliers might believe that a buyer’s commit- ment provides a cushion they can use to extract extra rents from a relationship or a buffer to protect them from conse- quences of their own misbehaviors. We suggest that under certain conditions, this supposition is well grounded, whereas in others, it is not; indeed, a buyer’s commitment can backfire on the supplier and intensify threats to the rela- tionship. We investigate when a buyer’s commitment has buffering effects that protect incumbent suppliers against their own misbehaviors and when it amplifies the adverse effects of relational threats. Understanding the circumstances in which buyer commitment buffers suppliers against their own misbehaviors and when it amplifies threats to relation- ships can provide useful insights both for “in-suppliers” that 362 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, APRIL 2010 ing, and Taylor 2004; Geyskens et al. 1996; Gilliland and Bello 2002; Gustafsson, Johnson, and Roos 2005; Verhoef 2003). It is characterized by sentiments of allegiance and faithfulness and reflects a party’s positive feelings toward its exchange partner. Whereas calculative commitment is grounded on rationality and economic concerns, such as switching costs, affective commitment has emotional roots and grows from social exchange (Gustafsson, Johnson, and Roos 2005). Opportunism and Unethical Behavior as Threats to Relationship From an incumbent supplier’s perspective, buyer commit- ment becomes most valuable when a relationship is chal- lenged or strained (e.g., by an incumbent supplier’s perceived violation of relational or societal norms). Although many types of supplier error can potentially challenge business-to- business relationships, we focus on two types of supplier misbehavior, opportunism and ethical violations, which occur frequently and threaten long-term business relationships. We define opportunism as transgression of the norms of a specific business relationship through behaviors such as evading obligations, taking advantage of contractual loop- holes, and exacting unfair concessions when market condi- tions allow (Hadfield 1990; Heide, Dutta, and Bergen 1998; Murry and Heide 1998; Stern, El-Ansary, and Coughlan 1998; Wathne and Heide 2000). As such, opportunism rep- resents a personal, a social, and an economic challenge to relationships, involving actions by one party that are directly detrimental to the interests of the other. Such behav- ior is likely to provoke a sense of betrayal of trust in the aggrieved party. We define unethical behaviors as transgressions of rela- tional or societal norms of fairness and honesty, such as pro- viding false information about products and services, exploit- ing workers, manipulating data, and using high-pressure sales and negotiation tactics (e.g., Kaptein 2008). Although, in general, unethical behavior can be either directed person- ally against the other party to the relationship or focused on issues exogenous to the relationship, for purposes of this study, we operationalize it as violations of societal norms (rather than as transgressions of specific relational norms).1 This narrow operationalization results in a clear distinction between opportunism (violations of specific relational norms) and unethical behavior (violations of societal norms that are not personally directed against the other party to the relationship). This distinction leads to theoretically grounded hypotheses predicting differential effects of commitment with respect to opportunism and unethical behavior. The business press is rife with examples of opportunism, such as suppliers cutting out channel members by selling direct to major customers to increase margins and attempt- ing to increase penetration by adding new distributors in what had been protected territories, and of unethical behav- iors, such as spreading false rumors, selling coercively, fail- ing to uphold industry and professional standards, and sell- are interested in maintaining the quality of ongoing relation- ships and for “out-suppliers” that want to encroach on com- petitors’ committed relationships. For example, in-suppliers would benefit from knowledge of circumstances that increase or decrease their vulnerability to competitive threat, whereas out-suppliers could formulate more effec- tive selling strategies with knowledge of circumstances in which buyers are most likely to entertain competitive over- tures (Brown 1995). If commitment buffers existing relationships against opportunism or unethical behavior, it is likely to do so only to a limited degree. Although commitment may cause mild incidences of misbehavior to be assimilated to a standard of normative behavior, resulting in buffering effects, when supplier misbehavior becomes conspicuous, it is likely that buffering effects will attenuate and cease to bind the buyer to the incumbent. We suggest that at least for modest levels of supplier misbehavior, status quo bias will result in greater stability in the relationship (Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler 1991; Samuelson and Zeckhauser 1988). Such status quo bias is based on the switching costs of calculative commit- ment and the social bonds of affective commitment. As sup- plier misbehaviors become more serious, the buffering effects of both calculative and affective commitment are likely to attenuate, and at severe levels of misbehavior, affective commitment may amplify the effects of misbehav- iors on switching intentions. When affectively committed buyers become aware of unethical or opportunistic seller behaviors, they may believe that their trust has been betrayed and become motivated to switch suppliers. The possibility that commitment can back- fire and amplify threats to buyer–seller relationships has not previously been investigated. The objectives of this study include assessing (1) when and to what extent commitment buffers, has no binding effect on, or amplifies the effects of supplier opportunism or unethical behavior on buyers’ switching intentions; (2) the differential effects of two types of supplier misbehavior (ethical violations and opportunism); (3) the differential buffering and amplifying effects of two forms of relation- ship commitment (affective and calculative); and (4) the theoretical process through which these effects occur. CONCEPTUAL MODEL AND HYPOTHESES The Role of Commitment in Buyer–Seller Relationships The relationship marketing literature has focused primar- ily on two forms of commitment: calculative and affective (Fullerton 2003; Gilliland and Bello 2002; Gustafsson, Johnson, and Roos 2005; Johnson et al. 2001). Calculative commitment reflects the extent to which exchange partners perceive the need to preserve a relationship to avoid the switching costs involved in leaving. This form of commit- ment is grounded on an “instrumental realization of the benefits of staying and the costs of leaving” (Gilliland and Bello 2002, p. 28). Several studies highlight the calculative aspect of commitment. For example, Gundlach, Achrol, and Mentzer (1995) describe commitment as being grounded on acts such as idiosyncratic investments, proprietary informa- tion disclosure, and adaptation to partners’ requirements. In contrast, affective commitment reflects social and psy- chological attachment to an exchange partner based on feel- ings of identification, loyalty, and affiliation (Bansal, Irv- 1Although from an institutional theory perspective Grewal and Dhar- wadkar (2002) suggest that societal norms influence relational norms, we manipulate the two types of buyer misbehavior orthogonally to permit clean tests of our hypotheses, which make clear distinctions between the two. Buffering and Amplifying Effects of Relationship Commitment 363 As supplier misbehavior becomes more conspicuous, it becomes increasingly difficult for buyers to assimilate such behavior to a normative standard. Even so, we suggest that for buyers high in calculative commitment, the latitude of noncommitment, in which neither assimilation nor contrast effects occur, will be wide enough to encompass even seri- ous instances of supplier misbehavior. Although a supplier’s aberrant behavior may violate social or societal norms implicit in the relationship, the buyer’s economic invest- ments in the relationship should constitute an inertial moti- vational force that influences buyer perceptions and inter- pretations and binds the parties together. Although a supplier’s violation of relational norms may provoke dis- cord, buyers’ calculative commitment should weigh in favor of continuance. When a supplier’s unethical and opportunis- tic behavior is conspicuous, however, the risk of economic harm to the buyer may become serious enough to override switching costs and prompt a change of supplier. Even then, because the latitude of noncommitment is relatively broad (compared with conditions in which the buyer has a deep personal psychological commitment), contrast effects result- ing in boomerang and threat amplification may not occur. Thus, we posit that calculative commitment should have (1) buffering effects at low levels of supplier misbehavior and (2) no effect at high levels of supplier misbehavior. H1: Calculative commitment has a buffering (assimilation) effect on buyers’ switching intentions when ethical viola- tions are mild and no effect when they are severe. H2: Calculative commitment has a buffering (assimilation) effect on buyers’ switching intentions when opportunism is mild and no effect when it is severe. Moderating Effects of Affective Commitment In contrast to calculative commitment, affective commit- ment involves a strong sense of identification, loyalty, affili- ation, and obligation. Gustafsson, Johnson, and Roos (2005, p. 211) describe affective commitment as “hotter, or more emotional” than calculative commitment, which is “colder, or more rational.” People develop personal relationships that supplement and reinforce their formal roles (Lawler and Yoon 1998; Ring and Van de Ven 1994). As such, affective commitment also constitutes a motivational influence that favors assimilation of mild levels of supplier misbehavior. Affectively committed buyers are likely to interpret ambigu- ous supplier behaviors in a manner consistent with the posi- tive affective tone of the relationship, leading to assimila- tion (buffering) effects when supplier misbehavior is mild (Finkel et al. 2002). Thus, at mild levels of supplier misbe- havior, we expect that affective commitment has a buffering effect on buyer switching intentions. Affective commitment may also contribute to a relatively broad latitude of noncommitment because affectively com- mitted buyers may be inclined to give suppliers the benefit of the doubt when they suspect (but have not confirmed) misbehavior. This is especially likely when the supplier’s misbehavior is not perceived as being directed at the buyer personally. However, when supplier misbehavior is severe and the buyer construes it as being directed specifically at it (e.g., as in the case of severe opportunism), contrast (ampli- fication) effects are likely. Affectively committed buyers are likely to perceive opportunism as betrayal of the personal trust they have invested in the relationship, leading to nega- ing products suppliers know to be substandard. These types of supplier misbehavior have not previously been investi- gated as threats to relationships that may be buffered or amplified by commitment. Assimilation and Contrast Social judgment theory holds that people’s prior judg- ments or attitudes produce systematic distortions in percep- tions of social stimuli (Eagly and Chaiken 1993; Sherif and Hovland 1961). The theory posits that social stimuli falling within a “latitude of acceptance” become assimilated to an anchor (i.e., prior judgment) that serves as a standard of ref- erence and thus are judged as more similar to the anchor than they actually are. For example, a buyer’s prior percep- tion that an incumbent supplier’s behavior has conformed to normative standards serves as an anchor, and behaviors that do not differ too greatly from this anchor are assimilated and judged acceptable. Therefore, supplier behaviors that are assimilated to a normative standard result in buffering effects, in which relational threats are dampened. Stimuli that are sufficiently discrepant from an anchor fall into a “latitude of rejection,” resulting in contrast effects, which make them appear more dissimilar from the standard than they actually are. For example, flagrantly unethical or opportunistic supplier behaviors, being clearly discrepant from a normative standard, fall into the latitude of rejection and prompt contrast effects, resulting in increased buyer switching intentions. Contrast effects result in ampli- fication of relational threats posed by supplier misbehavior. Between the latitudes of acceptance and rejection, the theory posits a “latitude of noncommitment,” in which nei- ther contrast (amplification) nor assimilation (buffering) effects occur. The theory holds that the width of this lati- tude, like the widths of the latitudes of acceptance and rejec- tion, is a function of the self-relevance to the perceiver of the phenomenon being judged. Calculative and affective commitment represent motivational influences that affect the widths of the latitudes of acceptance, rejection, and non- commitment and, therefore, whether buffering, amplifying, or null effects occur at given levels of relational threat. Rela- tional commitment is likely to carry with it a motivationally driven tendency to perceive and interpret supplier behaviors as being consistent with normative standards and, therefore, to result in assimilation (i.e., buffering) effects. Moderating Effects of Calculative Commitment When calculative commitment is high, buyers make tan- gible or intangible investments that are specifically tailored to the existing relationship and difficult to redeploy without substantial loss in value (Burnham, Frels, and Mahajan 2003; Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987; Heide and John 1992; Seabright, Levinthal, and Fichman 1992; Williamson 1985). Buyers that are committed to a supply relationship through economic switching costs (i.e., calculative commitment) are likely to assimilate supplier behaviors that differ mildly from a normative standard because they have little alterna- tive to remaining in the relationship, and they will be moti- vated to maintain cognitive consistency (Eagly and Chaiken 1993; Festinger 1957). Therefore, at modest levels of sup- plier misbehavior (either ethical violations or opportunism), we expect assimilation (buffering) effects of calculative commitment. 364 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, APRIL 2010 STUDY 1 In Study 1, we conducted four separate 2 × 2 between- subjects factorial experiments with undergraduate students from a large public university. This study subjected the theory-based predictions to a rigorous falsification attempt (Popper 1963) before proceeding to field-based applications of the theory (Calder, Phillips, and Tybout 1981). We con- ducted the experiments separately to ensure that manipula- tions did not have unintended spillover effects. Specifically, we believed that manipulating affective and calculative commitment orthogonally would be difficult. The first experiment examined the effects of calculative commitment and ethical violations (H1), the second experi- ment examined the effects of calculative commitment and opportunism (H2), the third experiment examined the effects of affective commitment and ethical violations (H3), and the fourth experiment examined the effects of affective commit- ment and opportunism (H4). A total of 440 study partici- pants completed the four experiments that collectively con- stitute Study 1. In each experiment, we randomly assigned participants to different experimental conditions. In all conditions, study participants assumed the role of a purchasing manager responsible for buying microchips for a midsize electronic equipment manufacturer. Joshi and Arnold (1997) found that similar scenarios using microchips were realistic and effective. We asked participants to evaluate an incumbent supplier and to decide whether to switch to an alternative supplier during a year-end performance review. Scenarios described the alternative supplier as capable of providing the same quality chips as those supplied by the incumbent. Partici- pants then received the commitment manipulation (either calculative or affective commitment, depending on the experiment). The calculative commitment manipulation emphasized the buyer’s dependence on the supplier and the costs of switching, whereas the affective commitment manipulation highlighted the buyer’s closeness to and iden- tification with the supplier (see Web Appendix A at http:// www.marketingpower.com/jmrapril10). In addition to information describing the supplier rela- tionship, participants in the ethical violations condition also received information about ethical violations committed by the incumbent supplier. This included providing false infor- mation, manipulating performance data, and using high- pressure sales tactics. Participants in the opportunism con- dition received information about the incumbent supplier’s opportunism. This included behaviors that were prohibited either explicitly or implicitly by the buyer. As we noted pre- viously, ethical violations were described as not being directed specifically at the buyer but rather as violations of societal norms of fairness and honesty, whereas opportunism was described as violating specific norms of the buyer–seller relationship. We report manipulation checks in Web Appen- dix B (http://www.marketingpower.com/jmrapril10). Dependent Measure Participants indicated their likelihood of switching from the incumbent to an alternative supplier on a scale ranging from 0 (“not at all likely to switch”) to 100 (“extremely tive reactions (Finkel et al. 2002; Morrison and Robinson 1997). Extending oneself to another entails exposure to risk and vulnerability. Although such exposure creates motiva- tional tendencies toward assimilating mild levels of supplier misbehavior, it may have the opposite effect when supplier misbehavior is perceived as being personally directed and severe enough to fall into the latitude of rejection. When the supplier exploits the buyer’s exposure opportunistically, negative affect and deterioration of the relationship are likely. As a result, damage to the flow of social reciprocity in the relationship may be irreparable and lead to dissolu- tion. The buyer’s affective commitment is likely to have a boomerang effect, making the likelihood of switching greater than it would be in a less committed relationship (Eagly and Chaiken 1993; Sherif and Sherif 1967). When buyers perceive that the supplier’s behavior is unacceptable (i.e., falls into the latitude of rejection), a sense of personal betrayal, leading to contrast effects, is likely. Antia and Frazier (2001) provide some evidence for the buffering and amplification effect in the context of franchis- ing relationships. They show that franchisors are more tol- erant of franchisees’ violations of contractual obligations when relationalism is high, suggesting a buffering effect when affective commitment is high. However, this effect is attenuated and leads to an amplification effect when viola- tions affect transaction-specific investments. In other words, when the relationship between the principal and the agent is strong and severe violations take place, principals are more likely to enforce harsh sanctions. Chandrashekaran and col- leagues (2007) show that long-standing customers and cus- tomers who have had favorable experiences in the past may be more sensitive to problems and less forgiving than new customers. We expect that contrast (amplification) effects are more likely to result from opportunism than from unethical behav- ior (which we operationalize as not being directed specifi- cally against the buyer) because buyers will have a wide latitude of noncommitment and tend to give suppliers the benefit of the doubt when suppliers are accused or suspected of unethical behavior that is not directed personally against the buyer. On the basis of the foregoing reasoning, we posit the following: H3: Affective commitment has a buffering (assimilation) effect on buyers’ switching intentions when ethical violations are mild and no effect when they are severe. H4: Affective commitment has a buffering (assimilation) effect on buyers’ switching intentions when opportunism is mild and an amplification (contrast) effect when it is severe. In summary, H1 and H3 predict identical effects of calcu- lative commitment and affective commitment with respect to ethical violations; specifically, both should have buffer- ing effects on buyers’ switching intentions when ethical vio- lations are mild but no effect when they are severe. In con- trast, H2 and H4 predict differential effects of the two forms of commitment with respect to opportunism. In particular, calculative commitment should have a buffering effect when opportunism is mild but no effect when it is severe, whereas affective commitment should have a buffering effect when opportunism is mild but an amplification effect when it is severe. Buffering and Amplifying Effects of Relationship Commitment 365 likely to switch”).2 The next section discusses the results of Study 1, which we depict in Figure 1. Calculative Commitment H1 predicted a buffering (assimilation) effect of calcula- tive commitment when ethical violations are mild but no effect when they are severe. Consistent with this prediction, the calculative commitment × ethical violations interaction was marginally significant (F1, 63 = 2.78, p < .10). To better understand the form of the interaction, we analyzed the sim- ple main effects of ethical violations on switching intentions at high and low levels of calculative commitment. The results show that the buffering effect of calculative commit- ment on switching intentions is significant for mild (low calculative commitment = 83.13 versus high calculative commitment = 65.71, p < .05) but not for severe (low calcu- lative commitment = 83.89 versus high calculative commit- 2We also assessed the likelihood that the respondent would continue to buy from the current supplier on a 0% (definitely switching to a new sup- plier) to 100% (definitely continuing with the current supplier) scale. The results are almost identical to the dependent variable that measured the extent to which they would switch. Calculative Commitment (CC) × Ethical Violations (H1) 95 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Calculative Commitment (CC) × Opportunism (H2) 95 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Figure 1 STUDY 1 RESULTS: ILLUSTRATING BUFFERING AND AMPLIFYING EFFECTS IN THE FACE OF INCUMBENT MISBEHAVIORS AND VIOLATIONS Mild Severe Low CC 83.1 83.9 High CC 65.7 79.5 Severity of Ethical Violations Mild Severe Low CC 67.8 72.8 High CC 50 70.4 Severity of Opportunism Affective Commitment (AC) × Ethical Violations (H3) 95 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Affective Commitment (AC) × Opportunism (H4) 95 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Mild Severe Low AC 74.6 92.3 High AC 46.8 86.2 Severity of Ethical Violations Mild Severe Low AC 70.3 79.4 High AC 64.1 84.2 Severity of Opportunism Notes: Error bars reflect standard error of the mean. 366 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, APRIL 2010 ment = 79.47, not significant [n.s.]) ethical violations. Thus, calculative commitment buffers relationships against mild but not against severe ethical violations. As H2 predicted, we found a significant buffering effect of calculative commitment against mild opportunism but no effect when opportunism was severe. The calculative com- mitment × opportunism interaction was significant (F1, 96 = 4.0, p < .05). Analysis of simple main effects showed a sig- nificant buffering effect when opportunism was mild (low calculative commitment = 67.8 versus high calculative com- mitment = 50.0, p < .05) but not when it was severe (low cal- culative commitment = 72.8 versus high calculative commit- ment = 70.4, n.s.). Thus, calculative commitment buffers relationships against mild but not against severe opportunism. Affective Commitment As H3 predicted, we found a significant buffering effect of affective commitment against mild ethical violations; the calculative commitment × ethical violations interaction was significant (F1, 140 = 12.13, p < .01). Examination of the simple main effects indicated a strong buffering effect of affective commitment on switching intentions when ethical violations were mild (low affective commitment = 74.6 ver- sus high affective commitment = 46.8, p < .01) but no effect when the ethical violations were severe (low affective com- mitment = 92.3 versus high affective commitment = 86.2, n.s.). Thus, affective commitment buffers relationships against mild but not against severe ethical violations. As H4 predicted, the affective commitment × oppor- tunism interaction was significant (F1, 139 = 3.74, p < .05). Analysis of simple main effects showed a marginally sig- nificant buffering effect in the mild opportunism condition (low affective commitment = 70.26 versus high affective commitment = 64.12, p < .10) but a marginally significant amplifying effect of affective commitment on switching intentions in the severe opportunism condition (low affective commitment = 79.4 versus high affective commitment = 84.20, p < .10). Thus, affective commitment buffers the incumbent supplier against mild opportunism, but when opportunism is severe, affective commitment produces a contrast effect, amplifying switching intentions. Discussion The results of Study 1 support all four hypotheses. Calcu- lative commitment had buffering effects when both ethical violations and opportunism were mild, but these effects attenuated when the misbehaviors were severe. Affective commitment had similar buffering effects when ethical vio- lations and opportunism were mild. However, when oppor- tunism was severe, affective commitment amplified switch- ing intentions. Thus, affective commitment can produce either buffering or amplifying effects, depending on the severity of supplier misbehavior and whether the buyer assimilates or contrasts the behavior with respect to a nor- mative standard of behavior. Study 2 extends the investigation to executive and work- ing MBA students with an online data collection procedure. As we describe and report in the following sections, Study 2 tests the same hypotheses as Study 1, but it also extends the work by testing a mediation hypothesis that reflects the theoretical process through which buffering and amplifying effects occur. STUDY 2 As in Study 1, we conducted four separate 2 × 2 between- subjects factorial experiments using executive MBA and working MBA students from two large public universities. We conducted these experiments using an online survey Web site (Qualtrics). We ran the experiments separately to avoid unintended spillover effects of the manipulations. Four hundred twenty study participants completed the four experiments that constitute Study 2. All were full-time executives or managers in organizations in the southwestern United States, their average age was 28.5, they had an aver- age of 4.78 years of full-time work experience, and 67% were men. We randomly assigned participants to conditions. Procedures and manipulations are similar to Study 1; we describe them, along with manipulation check results, in greater detail in Web Appendixes A and B (http://www. marketingpower.com/jmrapril10). Dependent and Process Measures Participants indicated their likelihood of switching from the incumbent to an alternative supplier on a scale ranging from 0 (“not at all likely to switch”) to 100 (“extremely likely to switch”).3 Our theoretical framework posits that assimilation (buffering) effects result from buyers perceiv- ing supplier actions as consistent with a normative standard, whereas contrast effects result from buyers perceiving sup- plier actions as discrepant from a normative standard. Thus, to assess the theoretical process underlying the hypothe- sized effects, we asked study participants to rate the extent to which they perceived the supplier’s behavior as conform- ing with what they would expect, being typical of supplier behavior, and being acceptable. We combined these three items into a composite index (α = .72) of conformance to a normative standard of behavior. Consistent with the theoretical framework, we reasoned that buyer perceptions of the supplier’s conformance to a normative standard would mediate the buffering and ampli- fying effects of commitment on buyer switching intentions. In other words, if buffering effects occur by assimilating mild instances of supplier misbehavior to a normative stan- dard, controlling for buyer perceptions of conformance to normative standards should account for (i.e., completely mediate) the buffering effects. Likewise, because we con- ceptualize amplification (contrast) effects as resulting from perceiving supplier behavior as clearly discrepant from nor- mative standards, we expect that buyer perceptions of con- formance to normative standards will completely mediate the predicted amplification effect. Calculative Commitment We depict the results of Study 2 in Figure 2. Consistent with H1, the calculative commitment × ethical violations interaction was significant (F1, 106 = 4.58, p < .05). To probe the interaction, we analyzed the simple main effects of ethi- cal violations on switching intentions at high and low levels of calculative commitment. The results show the predicted 3Similar to Study 1, we assessed the likelihood that the respondent would continue to buy from the current supplier on a 0% (definitely switch- ing to a new supplier) to 100% (definitely continuing with the current sup- plier) scale. The results are almost identical to the dependent variable that measured the extent to which they would switch. Buffering and Amplifying Effects of Relationship Commitment 367 buffering effect of calculative commitment on switching intentions for mild (low calculative commitment = 70.7 ver- sus high calculative commitment = 44.3, p < .01) but not for severe (low calculative commitment = 82.5 versus high cal- culative commitment = 72.8, n.s.) ethical violations. Thus, calculative commitment buffers relationships against mild but not against severe ethical violations. As H2 predicted, we found a significant calculative com- mitment × opportunism interaction, indicating a buffering effect of calculative commitment when opportunism was mild (low calculative commitment = 79.1 versus high calcu- lative commitment = 63.7, p < .01), but no effect when opportunism was severe (low calculative commitment = 86.5 versus high calculative commitment = 78.3, n.s.). Thus, calculative commitment buffers relationships against mild but not against severe opportunism. Affective Commitment As H3 predicted, the affective commitment × ethical vio- lations interaction was significant (F1, 90 = 9.81, p < .01). Examination of the simple main effects indicated a buffer- ing effect of affective commitment when ethical violations were mild (low affective commitment = 71.9 versus high affective commitment = 37.1, p < .01) but no effect when ethical violations were severe (low affective commitment = 73.5 versus high affective commitment = 65.5, n.s.). Calculative Commitment (CC) × Ethical Violations (H1) 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Calculative Commitment (CC) × Opportunism (H2) 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Figure 2 STUDY 2 RESULTS: ILLUSTRATING BUFFERING AND AMPLIFYING EFFECTS IN THE FACE OF INCUMBENT MISBEHAVIORS AND VIOLATIONS Mild Severe Low CC 70.7 82.5 High CC 44.3 72.8 Severity of Ethical Violations Mild Severe Low CC 79.1 86.5 High CC 63.7 78.3 Severity of Opportunism Affective Commitment (AC) × Ethical Violations (H3) 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Affective Commitment (AC) × Opportunism (H4) 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Mild Severe Low AC 71.9 73.5 High AC 37.1 65.5 Severity of Ethical Violations Mild Severe Low AC 73 78.4 High AC 63.5 84 Severity of Opportunism Notes: Error bars reflect standard error of the mean. 368 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, APRIL 2010 with sales of more than $250 million, and the average age of the respondent was 50 (ages ranged from 32 to 64 years). Stimuli and Measures The study was organized into four parts. In the first (Part A), we asked study participants to identify a current supplier whose products were important to their firm but who could potentially be replaced without doing substantial harm to their operations. Then, we asked participants to provide background information about this supplier (the type of product purchased, how long they have done business with the supplier, and the percentage of procurements in the product category represented by the supplier) and to respond to the commitment measures with respect to this relationship. We measured calculative and affective commit- ment using 11 and 5 items, respectively (see Web Appendix B at http://www.marketingpower.com/jmrapril10). We also asked them to indicate the likelihood that they would switch to a new supplier over the next six months on a scale of 0 (“not at all likely to switch to a new supplier”) to 100 (“extremely likely to switch to a new supplier”). This con- stitutes the preexisting or baseline standard of switching intentions (i.e., at status quo, before manipulations). In Part B, we asked study participants to imagine that they were reviewing their relationship with the incumbent supplier. We emphasized a single factor (either unethical behavior or opportunism) as being central to this evaluation. We then presented the scenario, manipulating either unethi- cal behavior or opportunism as the evaluation factor. We manipulated these factors (i.e., unethical behavior, oppor- tunism) sequentially (i.e., one in Part B, one in Part C) in separate scenarios. After reading the Part B manipulation scenario, participants indicated their likelihood of switching to a new supplier over the next six months. In Part C, we again asked participants to focus on the relationship with the supplier they described in Part A. In this section, we manipulated the remaining supplier misbe- havior and measured likelihood of switching in the same manner as in Part B. To minimize the impact of the previ- ously manipulated factor, we emphasized that the two tasks were separate.5 The fourth and final part of the study included demographic items and other control variables. Experimental Design The design consists of two between-subject factors (ethi- cal violations and opportunism), each consisting of two levels (mild and severe). The manipulations were the same as in the previous studies. To avoid sequence effects, we counterbalanced the order of presentation of the unethical behavior and opportunism manipulations. Measures, meas- urement model validation, control variables, and manipula- tion check results appear in Web Appendix B (http://www. marketingpower.com/jmrapril10). Consistent with H4, we also found a significant affective commitment × opportunism interaction (F1, 125 = 8.02, p < .01). As predicted, we found a significant buffering effect when opportunism was mild (low affective commitment = 73.04 versus high affective commitment = 63.50, p < .05) but a marginally significant amplifying effect of affective commitment when opportunism was severe (low affective commitment = 78.42 versus high affective commitment = 84.10, p < .10). Affective commitment buffers the incum- bent supplier against mild opportunism, but when oppor- tunism is severe, affective commitment amplifies switching intentions. Mediation and Process Testing Mediation tests of the assimilation and contrast process underlying these effects uniformly indicated that buyer per- ceptions of conformance to a normative standard completely mediated the buffering and amplification effects. Details appear in Web Appendix C (http://www.marketingpower. com/jmrapril10). Discussion Study 2 replicated the findings of Study 1 using executive and working MBA students and a different data collection method. As in Study 1, we found that calculative commit- ment buffers relationships when supplier misbehaviors are mild. When misbehaviors become severe, however, the buffering effects of calculative commitment attenuate and no longer protect the incumbent supplier from relational threats posed by their own misbehaviors. As in Study 1, we found similar buffering (assimilation) effects of affective commitment at mild levels of both ethi- cal violations and opportunism. However, when oppor- tunism was severe, affective commitment again amplified switching intentions. Perceived conformance to normative standards completely mediated the observed buffering and amplification effects, supporting the assimilation and con- trast process posited to explain these effects. Study 3 extends the investigation to a field setting in which practicing organizational buyers rate their calculative commitment and affective commitment with respect to an actual incumbent supplier and then respond to scenarios of misbehaviors by this supplier. Thus, in Study 3, we measure rather than manipulate commitment. STUDY 3 Sampling and Data Collection We sampled from a list of purchasing professionals in four Standard Industrial Classification groups.4 These include fabricated metal products; industrial and commer- cial machinery and computer equipment; electronic and electrical equipment components; and measurement, con- trol, and analysis equipment. We received 92 responses (from approximately 400 valid e-mail addresses), represent- ing roughly a 23% response rate, which approximates response rates in comparable Web-based surveys (e.g., Kaplowitz, Hadlock, and Levine 2004). The majority of respondents (75%) were men, 50% worked for companies 4Additional methodological details appear in Web Appendix D (http:// www.marketingpower.com/jmrapril10). 5To assess the extent to which the manipulation in the previous part affected the results, we ran regressions including the previous manipula- tion and also included sequence as a covariate. Both of these were not sig- nificant, suggesting that the participants treated both scenarios as separate tasks. Buffering and Amplifying Effects of Relationship Commitment 369 buyers obtain conclusive evidence of ethical violations, they become concerned about risking future investments in the relationship.6 We did not find a buffering effect of calculative commit- ment for either mild (b = –.04, n.s.) or severe (b = .11, n.s.) opportunism. Thus, the results of Study 3 do not support H2, because calculative commitment does not buffer the incum- bent supplier against even mild opportunism. Affective Commitment Contrary to H3, affective commitment did not interact with ethical violations (b = .09, n.s.). Thus, H3 is not sup- ported in Study 3. In contrast to the results of Studies 1 and 2, affective commitment did not buffer the incumbent sup- plier against mild unethical behavior. Consistent with the prediction of H4, we found a signifi- cant affective commitment × opportunism interaction (b = .37, p < .05). The simple slopes (at low and high levels of affective commitment) for mild and severe opportunism are significantly different from each other, and each slope is significant in the predicted direction (bmild = –.27, p < .05; bsevere = .10, p < .10).7 These findings indicate both the pre- dicted buffering and the predicted amplification effects and suggest that affectively committed buyers are willing to give incumbent suppliers the benefit of the doubt when oppor- tunism is mild but perceive severe opportunism as a betrayal of trust, to which they react swiftly and negatively.8 Mediation and Process Testing We again tested the processes implied by the assimilation and contrast framework by assessing whether conformance to normative standards mediated the observed effects. Con- formance to normative standards was strongly related to the interaction of commitment and supplier misbehavior for the significant calculative commitment × unethical behavior and affective commitment × opportunism interactions, and inserting conformance to normative standards into the equa- tion caused the interaction parameter estimates to drop to nonsignificance. This again indicates that controlling for conformance to normative standards accounts for (com- pletely mediates) the observed buffering and amplification effects in a manner consistent with the assimilation and contrast framework. Details appear in Web Appendix D (http://www.marketingpower.com/jmrapril10). Discussion The results of Study 3 again indicate differential effects of calculative and affective commitment with respect to both ethical violations and opportunism. Calculative com- mitment buffered the incumbent supplier against its own Analysis and Results We tested the hypotheses using ordinary least squares regression. Because we manipulated the supplier misbehav- iors independently of one another and measured switching intentions with respect to each, we conducted separate analyses for unethical behaviors and opportunism, respec- tively. In both models, we included calculative and affective commitment, ethical violations (or opportunism), the inter- actions of calculative and affective commitment with the supplier misbehavior, and the four control variables as inde- pendent variables. To test the hypothesized buffering and amplifying effects, we examined the interactions between commitment (both calculative and affective) and supplier misbehaviors. Sig- nificant interactions indicate differential buffering (or amplifying) effects across levels of supplier errors. We also examined the simple main effect of commitment at different levels of supplier errors. The results appear in Table 1 and Figure 3. Calculative Commitment As Table 1 and Figure 3 show, consistent with H1, we found a marginally significant calculative commitment × ethical violations interaction (b = .37, p < .10). The simple slopes indicate a buffering effect of calculative commitment when ethical violations are mild (bmild = –.38, p < .05). This effect attenuates when ethical violations are severe (bsevere = –.01, n.s.), suggesting that when economically committed 6We obtained the parameter estimate for the severe condition by adding the calculative commitment estimate for mild-level ethical violations (–.38) to the calculative commitment × ethical violations estimate (.37), which resulted in a parameter estimate of –.01. 7To test whether the slopes are significantly different from a hypothe- sized value of zero for each level of ethical violation, we first calculated the standard error for each level using the covariance matrix for the esti- mates. We then obtained the t-values and their significance by dividing the slope for a given level by its standard error (for more details, see Jaccard, Turrisi, and Wan 1990). 8Again, we obtained the parameter estimate for severe condition by adding the baseline estimate (–.27, p < .05) to the estimate when severity is high (.37, p < .05), which resulted in the beta estimate of .10. Table 1 RESULTS OF STUDY 3 Switching Intentions (Standardized Coefficients) Ethical Violations Opportunism Independent Variables Model Model Buyer Commitment to the Supplier Affective commitment –.21 –.27** Calculative commitment –.38** –.04 Level of Supplier Misbehaviors Level of ethical violations (severe versus mild) .29*** Level of opportunism (severe versus mild) — .37*** Interactions Opportunism × affective commitment — .37** Opportunism × calculative commitment — .15 Ethical violations × affective commitment .09 Ethical violations × calculative commitment .37* Covariates Length of personal relationship .18 .07 Length of company’s relationship –.31** –.16 Number of suppliers –.26** –.36*** Percentage of procurements from the supplier –.02 –.02 F 2.4** 3.37*** Adjusted R2 .15 .23% *p < .10. **p < .05. ***p < .01. 370 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, APRIL 2010 ethical violations, whereas affective commitment did not. These results support the idea that calculative commitment constitutes an inertial force that ties the buyer to the incum- bent in the face of mild supplier violations of societal norms. As we predicted, affective commitment buffered the incumbent supplier against mild opportunism because buy- ers apparently assimilated small transgressions to a norma- tive standard of behavior, but it amplified buyers’ switching intentions when opportunism was severe. This suggests that affectively committed buyers experience a sense of betrayal and react negatively when the incumbent flagrantly violates the relational contract. As in Study 2, we found that buyer perceptions of the supplier’s conformance to normative standards mediated the observed buffering and amplifica- tion effects in a manner consistent with the assimilation and contrast framework. In this study, however, affective com- mitment did not buffer incumbent suppliers against mild unethical behavior as it did in Studies 1 and 2. GENERAL DISCUSSION The results of these studies indicate complex effects of relationship commitment that substantially extend what has previously been reported. In particular, they provide consis- Calculative Commitment (CC) × Ethical Violations (H1) 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Calculative Commitment (CC) × Opportunism (H2) 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Figure 3 STUDY 3 RESULTS: ILLUSTRATING BUFFERING AND AMPLIFYING EFFECTS IN THE FACE OF INCUMBENT MISBEHAVIORS AND VIOLATIONS Mild Severe Severity of Ethical Violations Mild Severe Severity of Opportunism Affective Commitment (AC) × Ethical Violations (H3) 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Affective Commitment (AC) × Opportunism (H4) 90 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 B u ye r’ s S w it ch in g In te n ti o n s Mild Severe Severity of Ethical Violations Mild Severe Severity of Opportunism Notes: Both calculative commitment and affective commitment are continuous variables in this study. To derive point estimates, we assessed the effects of calculative and affective commitment at one standard deviation above and one standard deviation below the mean. The switching intention estimates are based on unstandarized parameter estimates. Low AC High AC Low CC High CC Buffering and Amplifying Effects of Relationship Commitment 371 tent evidence of amplification (contrast) effects, in addition to demonstrating systematic buffering (assimilation) effects of calculative and affective commitment when interorgani- zational relationships are strained by supplier misbehavior. Amplification Effects All three studies provide evidence of amplification effects of affective commitment when incumbent suppliers behave opportunistically. In all three studies, affective commitment buffered the incumbent supplier against mild opportunism but amplified buyer switching intentions when opportunism was severe. This strongly suggests that affectively commit- ted buyers assimilate mild incidences of opportunism to normative relational standards, whereas they perceive severe opportunism as betrayal of the relational contract, leading to amplification (contrast) effects. As these patterns indicate, buyers responded more severely to an incumbent’s opportunism (e.g., violating their obligations in the relationship) than to unethical behavior. A plausible reason is that opportunism is directed specifically toward the buyer in the relationship, whereas unethical behavior may or may not directly threaten the buyer’s immediate interests. This is likely to result in a narrower lat- itude of acceptance and a broader latitude of rejection for opportunism than unethical behavior because buyers are more sensitive to violations of specific relational norms than to violations of general societal norms (at least until the lat- ter become conspicuous or flagrant). Buffering Effects All three studies also show systematic evidence of buffer- ing effects. Although we predicted buffering effects for mild incidences of both types of supplier misbehavior, the most consistent buffering effect was that of calculative commit- ment in response to mild ethical violations. In all three stud- ies, calculative commitment buffered buyer switching inten- tions when ethical violations were mild. When these misbehaviors were severe, however, the buffering effects of calculative commitment attenuated and no longer protected incumbent suppliers from relational threats posed by their own misbehaviors. These results suggest that the perceptual and motivational impulses leading to buffering (assimila- tion) effects occur consistently in the types of supply rela- tionships we studied. Specifically, commitment causes buy- ers to assimilate mild incidences of supplier misbehavior to a normative standard, but this tendency attenuates as misbe- havior becomes more severe.9 Even so, in a manner consistent with the conceptual framework, amplification effects occurred only for affective commitment in response to severe opportunism. High cal- culative commitment did not lead to amplification (contrast) effects for either ethical violations or opportunism, suggest- ing that economic ties to the relationship tend to subdue responses to supplier misbehavior. However, the results clearly show that incumbent suppliers cannot rely on rela- tionship commitment (affective and calculative) to buffer buyer switching intentions against serious ethical violations and opportunism. The finding that calculative commitment did not buffer against opportunism in Study 3 and severe opportunism elicited amplification effects in all three studies suggests that opportunism (which we defined operationally as a transgression of specific relational norms) constitutes a more serious threat to relationship continuity than ethical violations (which we defined operationally as not being directed specifically at the relational partner). When buyers with high calculative commitment encoun- tered mild ethical violations, we found strong buffering (assimilation) effects, but when they encountered severe ethical violations, these effects attenuated, suggesting that buyers were concerned about potential negative implica- tions for the relationship, even though the ethical violations were not specifically directed at them. In contrast, when affectively committed buyers encountered severe oppor- tunism, they experienced a sense of betrayal, leading to a strong negative reaction (i.e., an amplification effect). Thus, the results provide clear insights regarding conditions under which buffering and amplification effects emerge. Managerial Implications The findings indicate that while relational bonds may buffer incumbent suppliers against minor misbehaviors, they may work against suppliers that behave opportunisti- cally. Suppliers that believe relational bonds provide a mar- gin for error in such circumstances may be unpleasantly sur- prised when buyers respond by entertaining bids from competitors. Although we are unaware of previous studies assessing the adverse (amplifying) effects of relationship commit- ment, the relationship marketing literature has frequently extolled the benefits of commitment in promoting relation- ship continuity, effectiveness, and performance (e.g., Ander- son and Weitz 1992; Brown, Lusch, and Nicholson 1995; Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987; Lusch and Brown 1996). The findings highlight the limitations of commitment when a relationship is strained by supplier misbehavior and the potential for commitment to backfire under these circum- stances. The consistency of amplification effects across the three studies suggests that suppliers cannot rely on buyer commitment to ensure continuity when supplier actions transgress relational norms. Although we found a consis- tent, albeit modest, tendency for buyers to give the supplier the benefit of the doubt in response to mild transgressions, there is also a reliable tendency for buyers to consider switching when the incumbent’s misbehavior is conspicu- ous and undeniable. Managers should be aware of the differential buffering effects of the two types of commitment. A buyer’s calcula- tive commitment tends to be less sensitive to supplier mis- behavior than affective commitment. Buyers’ calculative investments in the relationship constitute an inertial force toward continuance. In contrast, affective ties are highly sensitive to supplier misbehaviors, especially opportunism, and amplify switching intentions. Understanding the bases and dynamics of commitment can help “in-suppliers” improve relational dynamics and “out-suppliers” enhance their chances of penetrating new accounts. 9Note that our assimilation and contrast explanation of buffering effects is not incompatible with a purely economic perspective, in that switching costs bind buyers to relationships strongly enough that the relationships can survive mild levels of misbehavior but not strongly enough to survive severe misbehaviors. 372 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, APRIL 2010 Limitations and Further Research This research has several limitations. We focus on a single dependent variable, switching behavior. A promising avenue for further research is to consider actual switching behavior. Our studies also focused specifically on buyer responses to supplier misbehaviors. It would be worthwhile to investigate the effects of commitment in response to offers from alternative suppliers. For example, understand- ing more specifically how buyers make trade-offs between the status quo and superior offers from alternative suppliers would be desirable. Another worthwhile set of issues is whether the chal- lenges to relationships that we studied influence buyers’ desire to renegotiate terms with the incumbent. Research on these issues might provide a more complete understanding of the factors that drive buyers’ switching decisions and the dissolution of committed buyer–seller relationships. Virtually the same issues could be analyzed from the sup- plier’s perspective. For example, it would be worthwhile to assess suppliers’ perceptions and thought processes in regard to their own misbehavior. Such research could inves- tigate suppliers’ explanations and accounts of their misbe- havior and how buyers perceive and respond to them. Note that additional types of supplier errors, such as poor performance, could threaten relationships in ways that we did not study. Research on the effects of commitment in response to other types of supplier shortcomings could shed additional light on the buffering and amplifying effects of commitment. CONCLUSION Under most conditions, buyer commitment to supply relationships works to buffer incumbent suppliers against mild incidences of unethical behavior and opportunism. When these misbehaviors are mild, buyers tend to assimi- late them to normative standards of behavior, resulting in buffering effects. When supplier misbehavior becomes severe, however, the type of commitment makes a differ- ence, as calculative commitment and affective commitment moderate the relationships between misbehaviors and switching intentions differently. Whereas calculative com- mitment neither buffers nor amplifies the effects of severe supplier misbehavior, affective commitment amplifies buyer switching intentions in response to severe opportunism. Thus, although relationship commitment is beneficial and worthy of cultivation, it can backfire when trust is abused. Opportunism is the catalyst that transforms the relational buffer of affective commitment into leverage for challengers wanting to overturn a relationship. In these studies, we show these conceptually grounded but previously unexplored effects of relationship commitment, with implications for both incumbents’ defenses and challengers’ account pene- tration strategies. We hope that we have also raised ques- tions that will stimulate further research in this area. REFERENCES Anderson, Erin and Sandy J. Jap (2005), “The Dark Side of Close Relationships,” Sloan Management Review, 46 (3), 75–82. ——— and Barton Weitz (1992), “The Use of Pledges to Build and Sustain Commitment in Distribution Channels,” Journal of Marketing Research, 29 (February), 18–34. Antia, Kersi D. and Gary L. Frazier (2001), “The Severity of Con- tract Enforcement in Interfirm Channel Relationships,” Journal of Marketing, 65 (October), 67–82. Bansal, Harvir S., P. Gregory Irving, and Shirley F. Taylor (2004), “A Three-Component Model of Customer Commitment to Serv- ice Providers,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 32 (3), 234–50. Brown, James R., Robert F. Lusch, and Carolyn Y. Nicholson (1995), “Power and Relationship Commitment: Their Impact on Marketing Channel Member Performance,” Journal of Retailing, 71 (4), 363–92. Brown, Steven P. (1995), “The Moderating Effects of Insupplier/ Outsupplier Status on Organizational Buyer Attitudes,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 23 (3), 170–81. Burnham, Thomas A., Judy K. Frels, and Vijay Mahajan (2003), “Consumer Switching Costs: A Typology, Antecedents, and Consequences,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 31 (2), 109–126. Calder, Bobby J., Lynn W. Phillips, and Alice M. Tybout (1981), “Designing Research for Application,” Journal of Consumer Research, 8 (September), 197–207. Chandrashekaran, Murali, Kristin Rotte, Stephen S. Tax, and Rajdeep Grewal (2007), “Satisfaction Strength and Customer Loyalty,” Journal of Marketing Research, 44 (February), 153–63. Dwyer, F. Robert, Paul H. Schurr, and Sejo Oh (1987), “Develop- ing Buyer–Seller Relationships,” Journal of Marketing, 51 (April), 11–27. Eagly, Alice H. and Shelly Chaiken (1975), The Psychology of Attitudes. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich. Festinger, Leon (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stan- ford, CA: Stanford University Press. Finkel, Eli J., Caryl E. Rusbult, Madoka Kumashiro, and Peggy A. Hannon (2002), “Dealing with Betrayal in Close Relationships: Does Commitment Promote Forgiveness?” Journal of Personal- ity and Social Psychology, 82 (June), 956–74. Fullerton, Gordon (2003), “When Does Commitment Lead to Loy- alty?” Journal of Service Research, 5 (4), 333–45. Geyskens, Inge, Jan-Benedict E.M. Steenkamp, Lisa K. Scheer, and Nirmalya Kumar (1996), “The Effects of Trust and Inter- dependence on Relationship Commitment: A Trans-Atlantic Study,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 13 (4), 303–317. Gilliland, David I. and Daniel C. Bello (2002), “Two Sides to Atti- tudinal Commitment: The Effect of Calculative and Loyalty Commitment on Enforcement Mechanisms in Distribution Channels,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 30 (1), 24–43. Grayson, Kent and Tim Ambler (1999), “The Dark Side of Long- Term Relationships in Marketing Services,” Journal of Market- ing Research, 36 (February), 132–41. Grewal, Rajdeep and Ravi Dharwadkar (2002), “The Role of the Institutional Environment in Marketing Channels,” Journal of Marketing, 66 (July), 82–97. Gundlach, Gregory T., Ravi S. Achrol, and John T. Mentzer (1995), “The Structure of Commitment in Exchange,” Journal of Marketing, 59 (January), 78–92. Gustafsson, Anders, Michael D. Johnson, and Inger Roos (2005), “The Effects of Customer Satisfaction, Relationship Commit- ment Dimensions, and Triggers on Customer Retention,” Jour- nal of Marketing, 69 (October), 210–18. Hadfield, G.K. (1990), “Problematic Relations: Franchising and the Law of Incomplete Contracts,” Stanford Law Review, 42 (4), 927–92. Heide, Jan B., Shantanu Dutta, and Mark Bergen (1998), “Exclu- sive Dealing and Business Efficiency: Evidence from Industry Practice,” Journal of Law and Economics, 41 (2), 387–407. Buffering and Amplifying Effects of Relationship Commitment 373 ——— and George John (1992), “Do Norms Matter in Marketing Relationships?” Journal of Marketing, 56 (April), 32–44. Hess, Ronald, Shankar Ganesan, and Noreen Klein (2003), “Ser- vice Failure and Recovery: The Impact of Relationship Factors on Customer Satisfaction,” Journal of the Academy of Market- ing Science, 31 (2), 127–45. Jaccard, James, Robert Turrisi, and Choi K. Wan (1990), Inter- action Effects in Multiple Regression. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. Johnson, Michael D., Anders Gustafson, Tor Wallen Andreassen, Line Lervik, and Jaesung Cha (2001), “The Evolution and Future of National Customer Satisfaction Index Models,” Jour- nal of Economic Psychology, 22 (2), 217–45. Joshi, Ashwin and Stephen J. Arnold (1997), “The Impact of Buyer Dependence on Buyer Opportunism in Buyer-Supplier Relation- ships: The Moderating Role of Relational Norms,” Psychology & Marketing, 14 (18), 823–45. Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler (1991), “The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5 (1), 193–206. Kaplowitz, Michael D., Timothy D. Hadlock, and Ralph Levine (2004), “A Comparison of Web and Mail Survey Response Rates,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 68 (1), 94–102. Kaptein, Muel (2008), “Developing a Measure of Unethical Behavior in the Workplace: A Stakeholder Perspective,” Journal of Management, 34 (5), 978–1008. Lawler, Edward J. and JeongkooYoon (1998), “Network Structure and Emotion in Exchange Relations,” American Sociological Review, 63 (December), 871–94. Lusch, Robert F. and James R. Brown (1996), “Interdependency, Contracting, and Relational Behavior in Marketing Channels,” Journal of Marketing, 60 (October), 19–38. Morgan, Robert M. and Shelby D. Hunt (1994), “The Commitment– Trust Theory of Relationship Marketing,” Journal of Marketing, 58 (July), 20–38. Morrison, ElizabethWolfe and Sandra L. Robinson (1997), “When Employees Feel Betrayed: A Model of How Psychological Con- tract Violation Develops,” Academy of Management Journal, 22 (1), 226–56. Murry, John P. and Jan B. Heide (1998), “Managing Promotion Program Participation with Manufacturer–Retailer Relation- ships,” Journal of Marketing, 62 (January), 58–68. Popper, Karl R. (1963), Conjectures and Refutations. NewYork: Harper Torchbooks. Ring, Peter Smith and Andrew H. Van de Ven (1994), “Develop- mental Processes of Cooperative Interorganizational Relation- ships,” Academy of Management Journal, 19 (1), 90–118. Samuelson, William and Richard J. Zeckhauser (1988), “Status Quo Bias in Decision Making,” Journal of Risk and Uncer- tainty, 1 (1), 7–59. Seabright, Mark A., Daniel A. Levinthal, and Mark Fichman (1992), “Role of Individual Attachments in the Dissolution of Interorganizational Relationships,” Academy of Management Journal, 35 (1), 122–60. Sherif, Muzafer and Carl Hovland (1961), Social Judgement: Assimilation and Contrast Effects in Communication and Atti- tude Change. New Haven, CT:Yale University Press. ——— and Carolyn Sherif (1967), “Attitude as the Indiviual’s Own Categories: The Social Judgement-Involvement Approach to Attitude and Attitude Change,” in Attitude, Ego-Involvement, and Change, C.W. Sherif and M. Sherif, eds. NewYork: John Wiley & Sons, 105–139. Stern, Louis W., Adel I. El-Ansary, and Anne T. Coughlan, (1996), Marketing Channels. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. Verhoef, Peter C. (2003), “Understanding the Effect of Customer Relationship Management Efforts on Customer Retention and Customer Share Development,” Journal of Marketing, 67 (Octo- ber), 30–45. Wathne, Kenneth H. and Jan B. Heide (2000), “Opportunism in Interfirm Relationships: Forms, Outcomes, and Solutions,” Journal of Marketing, 64 (October), 36–51. Williamson, Oliver E. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capi- talism. NewYork: The Free Press. Copyright of Journal of Marketing Research (JMR) is the property of American Marketing Association and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.