Garnefeld_JournMarket_2013_5WVE.pdf
ambRnxrXsAAtUpp2g_r5xq0OUDAa-Garnefeld_JournMarket_2013_5WVE.pdf.plain.html

Ina Garnefeld, Andreas Eggert, Sabrina V. Helm, & Stephen S. Tax Growing Existing Customers’ Revenue Streams Through Customer Referral Programs Customer referral programs are an effective means of customer acquisition. By assessing a large-scale customer data set from a global cellular telecommunications provider, the authors show that participation in a referral program also increases existing customers’ loyalty. In a field experiment, recommenders’ defection rates fell from 19% to 7% within a year, and their average monthly revenue grew by 11.4% compared with a matched control group. A negative interaction between referral program participation and customer tenure reveals that the loyalty effect of voicing a recommendation is particularly pronounced for newer customer–firm relationships. A laboratory experiment further demonstrates that referral programs with larger rewards strengthen attitudinal and behavioral loyalty, whereas smaller rewards affect only the behavioral dimension. This article contributes to our theoretical understanding of the roles played by the commitment–consistency principle and positive reinforcement theory as mechanisms underlying the effectiveness of customer referral programs. Keywords: customer referral program, customer loyalty, commitment–consistency principle, positive reinforcement, propensity score matching Ina Garnefeld is Chaired Professor of Service Management, Schumpeter School of Business and Economics, University of Wuppertal (e-mail: garnefeld@wiwi.uni-wuppertal.de). Andreas Eggert is Chaired Professor of Marketing, University of Paderborn (e-mail: andreas.eggert@wiwi. uni-paderborn.de). Sabrina V. Helm is PetSmart Associate Professor of Retailing and Co-Director of the Consumers, Environment and Sustainability Initiative, University of Arizona (e-mail: helm@email.arizona.edu). Stephen S. Tax is Professor of Service Management and Francis G. Winspear Scholar, Peter B. Gustavson School of Business, University of Victoria (e-mail: stax@uvic.ca). © 2013, American Marketing Association ISSN: 0022-2429 (print), 1547-7185 (electronic) Journal of Marketing Volume 77 (July 2013), 17 –3217 Customer referral programs (CRPs)—defined asdeliberately initiated, actively managed, continuouslycontrolled firm activities aimed to stimulate positive word of mouth among existing customer bases (Schmitt, Skiera, and Van den Bulte 2011)—have received increasing attention from marketing researchers and practitioners (Kornish and Li 2010; Ryu and Feick 2007; Schmitt, Skiera, and Van den Bulte 2011). Their objective is to use the social connections between existing customers and noncustomers to attract the latter to the firm. To achieve this conversion, the firm invites existing customers to participate in a CRP. When customers participate, they voice recommendations to prospects, which results in a reward if the recommendation leads to the recipient purchasing the recommended product (East, Lomax, and Narain 2001). Particularly in service industries, CRPs are well established. For example, the cel- lular telecommunication provider T-Mobile credits cus- tomers’ accounts $25 for each successful referral, and Bank of America offers customers $25 if they refer a friend and $50 if they refer a business owner. Similar programs exist in an array of industries, including online retailers, energy providers, restaurants, accountants, and veterinary clinics. Referrals take on added strategic significance with the growing use of social networks to acquire product informa- tion and recommendations (Mooney and Rollins 2008). Existing studies on CRPs have explored the drivers of recommendation likelihood (Biyalogorsky, Gerstner, and Libai 2001; Kornish and Li 2010; Ryu and Feick 2007; Wirtz and Chew 2002). Other research confirms them to be an effective and cost-efficient means for gaining new cus- tomers with superior profitability for the firm (Schmitt, Skiera, and Van den Bulte 2011). Although the implications of CRPs for customer acquisition are increasingly well understood, it is still not clear whether and how they affect recommenders’ loyalty. Prior research has suggested some conflicting effects. Research into the relationship between commitment and consistency asserts that publicly stating a position, such as when making a recommendation, increases loyalty (Cialdini 1971). Ryu and Feick (2007) speculate, on the basis of self-perception theory, that engaging in word of mouth might reinforce recommenders’ satisfaction with the brand, but they also note the concern that making recom- mendations in return for a reward may undermine this effect. Lacking deeper insights, marketing managers tend to assess CRPs exclusively from a customer acquisition per- spective, thereby neglecting their potential effects on cus- tomer retention. The only empirical evidence shedding some light on the bonding effect of voicing a recommenda- tion comes from Garnefeld, Helm, and Eggert (2011), who conduct a series of laboratory experiments and find that giving favorable word of mouth has a positive impact on existing customers’ loyalty intentions, although the authors do not investigate rewarded recommendations. Considering the proliferation of CRPs in practice (Schmitt, Skiera, and Van den Bulte 2011), their impact on customer acquisition and customer retention is of great interest for marketing management and research. Although research shows that rewards stimulate referral likelihood (e.g., Kornish and Li 2010; Ryu and Feick 2007), it is also valuable to understand how referral fees affect recom- menders’ loyalty to the firm. Beyond that, the ability to identify groups of existing customers that are particularly prone to the bonding effect of voicing a recommendation is useful to both marketing scholars and practitioners. In this sense, our research differs from extant approaches in its focus on customer retention and growth goals rather than customer attraction components of CRPs. With this unique perspective, our article makes three important contributions. First, it theoretically and empirically establishes CRPs as means for retaining and growing rela- tionships with current customers. Second, it provides valuable information about whom firms should target with CRPs when adopting a customer retention perspective. We develop and empirically test a theoretical foundation for the effect of CRP participation on existing customers’ loyalty and find it to be particularly pronounced for newer customer– firm relationships. Third, our research offers guidance on how to implement effective CRPs. More specifically, we explore reward size as a key design element of CRPs and find that referral programs with larger rewards strengthen attitudinal and behavioral loyalty, whereas smaller rewards affect only the behavioral dimension. In summary, our findings help support a strategy of increasing the lifetime value of cus- tomers and improving customer equity (Rust, Lemon, and Zeithaml 2004). In the remainder of this article, we first explore attitudi- nal advocacy and the commitment–consistency principle as theoretical bases for explaining the effect of CRP participa- tion on customer loyalty and the role of customer tenure. Next, we examine behavioral data obtained from a global cellular telecommunications provider, using a propensity score matching approach. To address the impact of rewards on the recommendation–loyalty link and shed further light on the bonding process associated with participating in a CRP, we turn to self-perception and positive reinforcement theory to develop a laboratory experiment. We conclude by discussing the results of both studies, identifying limita- tions, and providing suggestions for further research. Study 1: The Loyalty Effect of CRP Participation and Customer Tenure In CRPs, a complex set of exchange interactions occurs: the firm offers the reward, the current customer makes the referral, and the noncustomer potentially acts on the referral and purchases from the firm (Ryu and Feick 2007). The payment of the reward is contingent on the success of the referral: the current customer receives the referral reward from the firm only if the referral leads the noncustomer to purchase the product. We focus on the impact of the reward on the relationship between the referring customer and the firm subsequent to the customer’s participation in a CRP. In this context, we find no studies that investigate the effects 18 / Journal of Marketing, July 2013 of a voiced recommendation on the recommender’s atti- tudes and behavior, even though greater understanding of this mechanism would offer valuable insights for improving customer loyalty and the profitability of CRPs. Theoretical Background Our conceptual framework and development of hypotheses involve three steps. First, we explain the underpinnings of attitudinal advocacy and the commitment–consistency prin- ciple. Second, we argue that participating in a CRP consti- tutes a public commitment. Third, we analyze how customer tenure affects the recommendation–loyalty link according to self-perception theory. Attitudinal advocacy and the commitment–consistency principle. Social psychology research shows that people who advocate a specific issue position tend to align their attitudes in the direction of that position (Cialdini 1971). Pledging or binding to a behavior results from having taken an action or made a statement (termed a “commitment” in psychology literature; Kiesler 1971). Such commitment arises because people who recognize that they have endorsed a position will attribute favorability toward it. A key factor that determines the magnitude of the advocacy effect is the “publicness” with which the person declares his or her commitment to a position (Cialdini 1971). Deutsch and Gerard (1955) find that commitments made in front of large groups are strongest, although broad publicity is not a necessary condition to evoke commitment; as Cialdini (1971) points out, intended advocacy also can induce it. The commitment–consistency principle is relevant to the desire to appear consistent to others (public consistency), but it also applies to a person’s desire to be consistent within his or her own attitudes and behaviors (internal consistency). Previous research has established, in diverse settings, the premise that people who make a commitment then tend to behave consistently with that commitment. For example, people who say they intend to vote are more likely to vote (Greenwald et al. 1987); people who publicly commit to losing weight are more successful in weight-loss programs (Nyer and Dellande 2010). Other studies confirm the rela- tionship between commitment and socially desirable behav- iors, including recycling (Katzev and Pardini 1987), energy conservation (Pallak, Cook, and Sullivan 1980), theft reduction (Moriarty 1975), use of public transportation (Bachman and Katzev 1982), and compliance with cause- related marketing communications (Vaidyanathan and Aggarwal 2005). Recommendation as public commitment and loyalty as consistency. General commitment–consistency explana- tions apply to both recommendations and CRPs, because a recommendation is a type of commitment. Davidow (2003) and Nyer and Gopinath (2005) interpret word of mouth as a public commitment or public stance regarding an evaluation of the firm or its offerings. By engaging in word of mouth, the customer takes a public position that is difficult to change. For example, after spreading negative word of mouth, a customer would find it difficult to claim satisfaction and repurchase the product (Davidow 2003). The pressure to behave consistently with a commitment also functions in recommendations, which imply an endorsement of the firm or its offerings (Chew 2006). If a customer recommends a firm but then switches to a different one, both the customer and others perceive those actions as inconsistent. In CRPs, the recommender also receives a reward from the firm if the recommendation leads the recipient to purchase the product or service (Ryu and Feick 2007; Schmitt, Skiera, and Van den Bulte 2011). Usually, all three parties (recommender, recipient, firm) know that the recommender has made a recommendation and that he or she received a reward if it successfully led the recipient to buy from the firm. This suggests that CRPs evoke public commitments that should have consistency effects. This rationale therefore implies a recommendation– loyalty link for recommenders. In repurchase situations, a customer likely behaves in a way consistent with his or her recommendation. A recommendation thus increases the likelihood that the recommender remains loyal, meaning that he or she remains committed to repurchase or repatronize a preferred product or service from the recommended firm in the future (Oliver 1997). In summary, we hypothesize the following: H1: Participation in a CRP increases recommenders’ loyalty. Role of customer tenure. Customer tenure, defined as the length of the customer relationship with the firm at the time of participation in a CRP, may explain why some cus- tomers are less affected than others by participation in a CRP. Our reasoning is based on self-perception theory (Bem 1972), which explains that, in certain situations, people learn about their inner states (i.e., attitudes) by observing their own overt behavior and the situational cues surrounding it (Fazio, Herr, and Olney 1984). When cus- tomers hear themselves recommending a product or service, they may conclude that they like it because otherwise they would not have made a recommendation (East, Lomax, and Narain 2001; Garnefeld, Helm, and Eggert 2011). However, only in the absence of stronger cues do freely performed behaviors toward an object offer a highly indica- tive reflection of its evaluation (Fazio, Herr, and Olney 1984). Therefore, attitude expressions based on self-perception processes should occur primarily for people with weaker prior attitudes toward the object (Chaiken and Baldwin 1981). Attitude strength can be defined as the “positivity or negativity (valence) of an attitude weighted by the confi- dence or certainty with which it is held” (Park et al. 2010, p. 1). Consequently, people can hold similarly favorable atti- tudes about an object but differ with regard to how certain they are (Rajagopal and Montgomery 2011). Longer-tenured customers are more likely to have formed strong attitudes about the firm before CRP participation than are shorter- tenured customers, because research has found knowledge about and direct experience with the attitude object to be important drivers of attitude strength (Krosnick et al. 1993; Marks and Kamins 1988). Thus, participation should have a stronger impact on the behavior of customers with shorter tenure, because they have weaker attitudes toward the firm at the time of CRP involvement. We therefore suggest that successfully recommending the firm provides salient behavioral information and a stronger Growing Existing Customers’ Revenue Streams / 19 influence on shorter-tenured customers’ inferred attitudes and subsequent behavior. In contrast, a self-perception account of attitude expression should be less pronounced for longer- tenured customers, because they rely on their rich knowl- edge base when deciding whether to remain with a firm. H2: The CRP participation–loyalty link is stronger for shorter- tenured than longer-tenured customers. Field Study Overview. A simple comparison of behavioral data from customers who either did or did not participate in a CRP would suffer from self-selection effects. In experimental terms, participation in a CRP can be interpreted as a treat- ment, and our research question pertains to whether the treatment causes a certain outcome (recommenders’ loyalty). We aim to determine outcome differences (difference in loyalty) between customers in the treatment condition and similar customers without the treatment. However, we can- not know how the treatment group would behave if these participants had not received the treatment (had not partici- pated in a CRP). Unlike in an experimental setting, we can- not randomly assign customers in a real-life setting to par- ticipation (i.e., treatment) and nonparticipation (i.e., control) groups. Rather, participants in a CRP have self- selected into the participation group, which implies they are at least somewhat satisfied and loyal. Customers who par- ticipate in a CRP likely differ substantially from those who do not, beyond their participation, so simply comparing the outcome variables for both groups is not a suitable solution. Matching procedures can address such self-selection biases (Dehejia and Wahba 2002); researchers apply them frequently in economics (Dehejia and Wahba 1999; LaLonde 1986) and medical studies (D’Agostino 1998), as well as more recently in marketing research (Hitt and Frei 2002; Wangenheim and Bayón 2007a). Matching methods create an artificial control group to solve the self-selection prob- lem (Caliendo and Kopeinig 2008; Wangenheim and Bayón 2007a). We accordingly matched each customer participat- ing in the CRP with a similar customer (“statistical twin”) who did not participate (Rässler 2002). We then compared the group of participants with the artificial control group of statistical twins in terms of their loyalty. Different procedures exist for finding nonparticipants who match each participant and creating matched samples (for an overview, see Caliendo and Kopeinig 2008); we applied propensity score matching (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983), which has proved advantageous in many settings (Dehejia and Wahba 2002; Wangenheim and Bayón 2007a). First, we conducted a binary logistic regression to calculate the propensity for participation in the firm’s CRP. Second, we built an artificial control group by matching each cus- tomer from the treatment group (i.e., CRP participants) with a customer who did not participate but achieved a similar participation propensity score. Third, we evaluated the quality of the matching. Fourth, we compared the loyalty of the treatment and control groups. Data. We analyzed data on German customers who were using prepaid cellular phones offered by a global telecommunications provider. Cellular telecommunications provides the focal setting for diverse research on CRPs (e.g., Ryu and Feick 2007), and most cellular telecommuni- cation providers use CRPs. Our focal firm grants a recom- mender a phone credit worth €10 if his or her recommen- dation results in the sale of a prepaid subscriber identity module card to a new customer. The size of the reward is similar to referral rewards for new prepaid contracts across the industry. We obtained data from 1,116 prepaid customers who participated once or twice in the CRP during the treatment period (January–December 2007). We ensured that these customers participated in the CRP only during the treatment period and not before or after. All participants successfully took part in the CRP such that the firm gained a new customer from their recommendations. The service provider’s CRP required these new customers to indicate who had referred them to the service before it rewarded the recommender. Therefore, in all cases, both new and existing customers were aware of the referral reward. In contrast, the service provider could not observe unsuccessful recommendations. To build the artificial control group, we considered a random sample of 26,560 customers who never participated in the company’s CRP and gathered data such as airtime (minutes per quarter), relationship length (days with the company before January 1, 2007), multimedia messaging service (MMS) (number per quarter), usage of high-speed downlink packet access (HSDPA) (yes/no), customer status (e.g., gold tier, platinum tier), and status points acquired in the company’s affinity program. To operationalize loyalty as our endogenous variable, we assessed customer churn, because the duration of customer relationships is a widely used mea- sure of loyalty (Bolton 1998; Nitzan and Libai 2011), as well as revenue streams. We applied a natural logarithm transformation to our revenue data to account for nonnor- mality. The behavioral data collection referred to the period between January 2006 and December 2008. All customer accounts were active in periods before and during the entire treatment period. Binary logistic regression. We performed a logistic regression to calculate the propensity score of participation in the CRP and then ran the matching procedure. Generally, propensity score matching is applicable only if the exoge- nous variables of receiving the treatment (i.e., participation in a CRP) have been established theoretically or in previous empirical studies (Caliendo and Kopeinig 2008). Many studies outline the antecedents of articulating word of mouth (for an overview, see East, Hammond, and Wright 2007), so we consider this requirement fulfilled. Satisfaction and loyalty are key determinants of word of mouth (e.g., Wangenheim and Bayón 2007b; Westbrook 1987). Because purchase amount and frequency often serve to operationalize loyalty (for an overview, see Verhoef 2003), we included customers’ activity level (airtime) in our model. Innovators among the customer base are more influ- ential and articulate more word of mouth (Engel, Kegerreis, and Blackwell 1969), so we also included MMS and HSDPA usage, which were in the beginning stages of their product life cycle in 2006 and mainly used by innovators. Wangenheim and Bayón (2007b, p. 244) find that new cus- 20 / Journal of Marketing, July 2013 tomers of a firm are more likely to articulate recommenda- tions because they “try to communicate the ‘goodness’ of their choice to others, either to convince themselves or to prevent others from disregarding their ability to make good choices.” Therefore, we predicted a negative link between relationship length and CRP participation. Compared with nonparticipants, CRP participants might be more deal prone, because they are interested in the reward (Ryu and Feick 2007). Thus, we included status and status points earned in the company’s affinity program, with the assump- tion that customers interested in gaining rewards from the affinity program would also be interested in gaining rewards from the CRP. To ensure that the treatment did not cause any of the selected exogenous variables, we required that the selected determinants be either fixed over time (e.g., gender) or col- lected before the treatment (Caliendo and Kopeinig 2008). Thus, we measured all the variables in the binary regression before the treatment period, in 2006. We provide the results from the logistic regression in Table 1. This regression confirmed the effects of customers’ activity level ( = .016, p < .05), relationship length ( = –.092, p < .000), and participation in the affinity program (status level  = .302, p < .000; status points  = .054, p < .000) on participation in a CRP. However, innovativeness did not receive confirmation as an antecedent variable (MMS  = .046, p > .1; HSDPA  = .112, p > .1). In line with Rubin and Thomas’s (2000) suggestion, we included all theoretically derived variables in our calculation of propensity scores. Matching evaluation. To match the propensity scores of participants with those of nonparticipants, we relied on the random order, nearest available pair-matching method algo- rithm (Smith 1997). With the Silverman (1986) rule, we determined a .001 tolerance zone for choosing a statistical twin. The tolerance zone specifies the maximal acceptable difference between the propensity scores of a participant and of a nonparticipant that could still be considered statis- tical twins. Even with this relatively restrictive tolerance TABLE 1 Determinants of CRP Participation Propensity (Study 1) Exogenous Regression Variable Coefficient Wald p-Value Constant –2.298 499.74 <.000 Airtime (minutes) .016 5.18 <.05 Relationship length –.092 498.47 <.000 (days before January 2007) MMS sent (number) .046 .22 >.1 HSDPA usage (yes/no) .112 .64 >.1 Status level within the .302 86.64 <.000 loyalty program Status points earned .054 91.96 <.000 within the loyalty program Notes: The coefficients “status points earned within the loyalty pro- gram,” “MMS sent,” and “contract length” are divided by 100; “airtime” is divided by 1,000. zone, we were able to match 1,097 of the 1,116 (98.3%) customers from the treatment group with customers who had not participated in a CRP. We were unable to find a sta- tistical twin within this tolerance zone for only 19 of the 1,116 participants. Following Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985), we calculated a percentage reduction in bias for all variables, a common tactic (Wangenheim and Bayón 2007a). As we show in Table 2, the matching procedure achieved a good bias reduction. Participants and nonparticipants exhibited differ- ent characteristics and behavior before the matching proce- dure but were relatively similar afterward. The average per- centage reduction in bias for all variables was 86.3%. Results. We use churn and revenue to operationalize loyalty. Researchers often use customer churn as a loyalty indicator (e.g., Schmitt, Skiera, and Van den Bulte 2011), because a lower churn rate implies that customers are staying with the firm for a longer time. Customers who do not churn repurchase the product or service, in line with our definition of loyalty. We also include revenue as a second indicator of loyalty. That is, high revenue results from a higher fre- quency of purchases, more money spent per purchase, and more cross-buying (Reinartz and Kumar 2003), which, in our context, can be due to customers concentrating their cellular communication spending with a specific provider. Figure 1 depicts the churn-reducing effect of participa- tion in a CRP. An analysis using the Cox (1972) model revealed a significant effect of participation in a CRP on the probability of being an active customer, that is, of not churning ( = 2.1, p < .001). Twelve months after the treat- ment period, the probability of being an active customer was 81% for nonparticipants but 93% for participants, in sup- port of H1. Participating twice in the CRP had no additional effect beyond the first recommendation ( = .23, p > .34). Tenure, measured as the length of the customer–firm relationship at the beginning of the treatment period, Growing Existing Customers’ Revenue Streams / 21 revealed a negative interaction effect with participation in the CRP on the probability of being active ( = –.03, p < .03), in support of H2. Specifically, participation amplified loyalty when customers were in an early stage of their cus- tomer life cycle. Those who had been with the company for a longer time exhibited weaker loyalty effects when partici- pating in a CRP. In Figure 2, we depict the natural logarithm of the monthly revenue of all active participants and nonpartici- pants from January 2006 to December 2008. We tested for differences in the revenue levels and trajectories (i.e., reve- nue development over time) between participants and non- participants before, during, and after the treatment period. In the pretreatment period (i.e., 2006), neither the revenue levels (F(1, 2,193) = .68, p > .40) nor the revenue trajecto- ries (F(11, 2,193) = 1.22, p > .26) revealed significant dif- ferences between CRP participants and their matched non- participants. Both became significant during the treatment period (2007) (levels F(1, 2,193) = 8.59, p < .004; trajecto- ries F(11, 2,193) = 3.00, p < .001). In 2008, after the treat- ment period, the level of revenues remained significantly different between groups (F(1, 2,193) = 4.91, p < .028), but their trajectories showed no significant differences (F(11, 2,193) = 1.12, p < .35). Again, we did not detect a significant difference between customers who participated once and those who participated twice (F(1, 2,193) = .24, p > .87). These results provided reassurance that our matching process was effective in canceling out both observed and unobserved differences between the matched groups. For example, a possible argument might be that recommenders tend to have higher levels of satisfaction than a control group. Because we matched our groups on behavioral rather than attitudinal variables, the differences between groups could be attributable to systematic variations in customers’ unobserved attitudinal disposition. In that case, we would expect differential revenue trajectories in the pretreatment TABLE 2 Group Means Before and After Matching and Percentage Reduction in Bias Before Matching After Matching Reduction Control Group Treatment Group Exogenous Control Group Treatment Group Percentage (N = 26,560) (N = 1,116) Variable (2006) (N = 1,097) (N = 1,097) in Biasa 414.36 1,006.56 Airtime 987.18 999.59 .98 2,179 1,550 Relationship length 1,597 1,566 .95 2.06 5.04 MMS sent 5.03 5.03 1.00 .03 .06 HSDPA .06 .05 .67 2.32 2.71 Status level in 2.80 2.69 .72 the loyalty program 86.39 225.61 Status points earned in 166.23 186 .86 the loyalty program aWe calculated the percentage reduction in bias using the following formula (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1985): where PRB = percentage reduction in bias, XiA = the mean for the treatment group after matching, XjA = the mean for the nontreatment group after matching, XiB = the mean for the treatment group before matching, and XjB = the mean for the nontreatment group before matching. PRB 1 X X X X ,i A j A i B j B= − − − 22 / Journal of Marketing, July 2013 4 6 8 1 01 _0 6 02 _0 6 03 _0 6 04 _0 6 05 _0 6 06 _0 6 07 _0 6 08 _0 6 09 _0 6 10 _0 6 11 _0 6 12 _0 6 01 _0 7 02 _0 7 03 _0 7 04 _0 7 05 _0 7 06 _0 7 07 _0 7 08 _0 7 09 _0 7 10 _0 7 11 _0 7 12 _0 7 01 _0 8 02 _0 8 03 _0 8 04 _0 8 05 _0 8 06 _0 8 07 _0 8 08 _0 8 09 _0 8 10 _0 8 11 _0 8 12 _0 8 FIGURE 1 CRP Participants’ Lower Churn Rates Participants Nonparticipants Month/Year Treatment Period 1 . . . Pe rc en ta ge o f A ct iv e Cu st om er s 01 _0 6 03 _0 6 05 _0 6 07 _0 6 09 _0 6 11 _0 6 01 _0 7 03 _0 7 05 _0 7 07 _0 7 09 _0 7 11 _0 7 01 _0 8 03 _0 8 05 _0 8 07 _0 8 09 _0 8 11 _0 8 FIGURE 2 CRP Participants’ Higher Revenue Streams Participants Nonparticipants Month/Year 2.8 2.6 2.4 2.2 2.0 1.8 1.6 In R ev en ue Treatment Period period as a logical consequence. That is, higher satisfaction levels in the recommender group would span the total observation period and be manifest in the more favorable revenue trajectory compared with that of the matched con- trol group. The absence of a significant difference in the pretreatment period instead provided evidence that our matching procedure achieved its intended purpose and har- monized the groups beyond the set of behavioral variables employed for the matching procedure. Therefore, the observed differences during and after the treatment period manifest due to the loyalty effect of participating in a CRP, in further support of H1. Study 2: Loyalty and Reward Size Study 1 confirmed a significant impact of participation in a CRP on recommenders’ loyalty (H1) and a negative effect of customers’ tenure on the recommendation–loyalty link (H2). However, it could not detail how voicing a recommendation translates into behavioral loyalty from a theoretical perspec- tive. Study 1 also could not reveal the potential role of reward size—or the value of the reward relative to the value of the recommendation to the firm—because all recom- menders received the same reward. Behavioral data based on different monetary reward sizes are difficult to find in real-life settings; companies typically offer only one reward for the same CRP. A managerial perspective still requires further insights into the effect of reward size on the recom- mendation–loyalty link to provide guidance for managers in determining whether paying small sums of money suffices to affect recommenders’ loyalty or if they must offer larger sums to achieve such effects. For Study 2, we therefore conducted a laboratory experiment in which we manipu- lated monetary rewards and extended our analysis by distin- guishing attitudinal and behavioral loyalty. Theoretical Background Prior research supports the two-dimensional measurement of loyalty as more accurate in its predictions of the future behavior of customers, because it can distinguish repeat purchase behavior that is attributable to convenience or chance versus that which arises from commitment (Yi and Jeon 2003). Oliver (1997, p. 392) defines loyalty as “a deeply held commitment to rebuy or repatronize a preferred product or service consistently in the future, despite situa- tional influences and marketing efforts having the potential to cause switching behavior.” Accordingly, we differentiate attitudinal and behavioral loyalty. Attitudinal loyalty is grounded in liking and a positive psychological attachment to the firm, whereas behavioral loyalty refers to the act of staying with the firm or intentions to do so (Dick and Basu 1994; Fullerton 2003; Hansen, Sandvik, and Selnes 2003; Oliver 1997; Yi and Jeon 2003). Because a positive attitude toward the firm or its offerings is usually a precursor of behavioral loyalty, we expect a positive relationship between attitudinal and behavioral loyalty (Dick and Basu 1994; Gruen, Summers, and Acito 2000; Verhoef 2003): H3: Attitudinal loyalty has a positive effect on behavioral loyalty. Growing Existing Customers’ Revenue Streams / 23 Participation in a CRP may affect the relationship between attitudinal and behavioral loyalty. Self-perception theory asserts that people cannot always infer their attitudes from their behavior, because the behavior might be caused by their prior attitude, an external cause, or both. Although both internal (e.g., prior attitudes) and external cue informa- tion can influence attitudinal judgments, the latter tends to dominate self-perception processes (Chaiken and Baldwin 1981). If several possible causes exist for a behavior, the actor must account for the configuration of factors that rep- resent plausible reasons. Accordingly, an attitudinal dis- counting principle may come into play such that “the role of a given cause in producing a given effect is discounted if other plausible causes are also present” (Kelley 1973, p. 113). Having given a recommendation may weaken the strength of the link between attitudinal and behavioral loy- alty because it represents an alternative cause for cus- tomers’ behavioral loyalty that ceteris paribus reduces the importance of their psychological attachment and identifi- cation with the firm. The recommender could discount an internal cue (i.e., liking the firm) as a cause and instead attribute his or her behavior to an external cause (i.e., the recommendation). This alternative cause may be particu- larly important in driving subsequent behavioral loyalty, because recommendations evoke public commitments that could have stronger consistency effects than internal cues (Cialdini 1971). In summary, we hypothesize the following: H4: Participation in a CRP weakens the effect of attitudinal loyalty on behavioral loyalty. Next, we predict the impact of reward size on the recommendation–loyalty link, using two competing theo- retical frameworks. We begin with reinforcement theory and then outline an alternative explanation based on self- perception theory. Positive reinforcement perspective. Studies of reinforce- ment in attitude formation and change in psychological and social psychological literature generally support the notion that attitudes can be strengthened through extrinsic and intrinsic rewards (e.g., Blau 1967; Kelley and Thibaut 1978). In most cases, liking for an attitude object, such as a group or task, increases with reward size (Leventhal 1964), and rewards positively affect attitudes toward the group or task (Aronson 2004). The notion of using rewards for posi- tive reinforcement is also prominent in marketing thought, as exemplified by customer loyalty programs (Yi and Jeon 2003). In loyalty programs, obtaining rewards can generate customers’ positive feelings toward the firm implementing the program (Tietje 2002) such that participants in loyalty programs show higher levels of attitudinal loyalty than do nonparticipants (Gomez, Arranz, and Cillan 2006). The per- ceived size of the reward also increases these positive atti- tudes (Yi and Jeon 2003). Unlike loyalty programs, in CRPs the rewarded task is positive advocacy of the firm, which leads to a purchase by a new customer. Positive advocacy, as an activity, typically makes the communicator’s attitude more extreme (Higgins and Rholes 1978). As East, Romaniuk and Lomax (2011) assert, conveying positive word of mouth may reinforce the purchase propensity of the communicator because he or she becomes more convinced about the merits of the recom- mended product or service, thus supporting the argument that participation in a CRP positively influences the recom- mender’s attitudinal loyalty. A reinforcement perspective would also suggest that referral rewards paid in the context of CRPs may bolster the rewarded recommender’s attitudi- nal loyalty toward the firm that paid the reward and that this effect should increase with the size of the reward (e.g., Lev- enthal 1964), leading us to hypothesize the following: H5: Participation in a CRP with large rewards has a stronger effect on attitudinal loyalty than participation in a CRP with small rewards. Self-perception theory perspective. Another explanation for the effect of the size of the reward, as initially suggested by Ryu and Feick (2007), is based on self-perception theory and leads to a contrary conclusion. According to self- perception theory, receiving a greater monetary sum prevents attitudinal inference from behavior (Fazio, Herr and Olney, 1984). In other words, the greater the inducement offered for performing an act that is consistent with a customer’s beliefs, the less committed he or she is to that act (Kiesler and Sakumara 1966). Behavior induced by or associated with a large extrinsic incentive may also weaken the impact of recipients’ attitudes due to the influence of overjustification (Bem 1972). Although it is expected that recommendations occur because the recommender has a positive attitude toward the firm (Chew 2006; Westbrook 1987), a large reward paid to CRP participants might override this norm (Ryu and Feick 2007). The attitudinal discounting principle may come into play (Kelley 1973) because several possible causes exist for the behavior. Having made a recommendation, the recom- mender could discount the internal cue (i.e., liking the firm) and instead attribute his or her behavior to the external cue (i.e., the large reward). Then the recommender would feel less committed to his or her advocated position, resulting in a weaker recommendation–loyalty link. A larger reward offers a possible external causal attribu- tion or justification that provides an alternative reason for attitude-discrepant behavior and also should serve as a highly salient external cue (Burger 1999; Chaiken and Baldwin 1981; Fazio, Zanna, and Cooper 1977). A smaller reward is less likely to do so such that the attributional dis- counting principle might not come into play when the refer- ral rewards are smaller (Kelley 1973). From this discussion, we derive the following hypothesis: H5alt: Participation in a CRP with large rewards has a weaker effect on attitudinal loyalty than participation in a CRP with small rewards. Experimental Study Design and participants. We used a 2 ¥ 2 factorial design in which we manipulated recommendations (referral, no referral) by exposing the treatment group to a situation in which participants had to articulate a recommendation; the referral reward was one of two levels (small reward, large reward). Thus, we experimentally created four groups. 24 / Journal of Marketing, July 2013 For the data collection, we recruited participants using an online panel. The invitation to participate in an academic study directed any interested respondents to a website con- taining the experiment. In total, 234 participants took part in the study and were randomly assigned to one of the four groups. The mean age was 40.7 years, and 47.4% of the respondents were women. We chose a scenario design, a popular method in marketing literature (Palmatier et al. 2009; Wagner, Hennig-Thurau, and Rudolph 2009), and used postpaid cellular telecommunication services as our setting. In the sample population, familiarity with the spe- cific service category is high: 96.2% of the participants owned a cellular phone, and of these, 61.6% used a contract based on a monthly rate (postpaid), whereas 38.4% used prepaid phones. Procedure. Each participant read a short scenario that contained a description of the participant’s relationship with a fictitious cellular telecommunication provider, “TelStar.” It described the business relationship in positive terms, because satisfaction is usually a prerequisite for a recom- mendation (Biyalogorsky, Gerstner, and Libai 2001; Chew 2006). In the scenario, the employees in the shop and on the hotline were friendly, the coverage was fine, and the value of the offer was good. To manipulate reward size, we showed participants different TelStar web pages. In the small reward group, the web page indicated that TelStar was inviting its customers to recommend TelStar if they were satisfied with its services and offered €5 if they suc- cessfully recommended the provider (see the Appendix, Condition 1a). Participants in the large reward group read that TelStar offered €50 if they recommended the provider (Appendix, Condition 1b). These reward sizes reflected the actual range of rewards offered for successful referrals that led to two-year contracts in the German cellular telecom- munications industry. Finally, we pretested several reward sizes, and the chosen amounts emerged as realistic and indicative of small and large rewards relative to the value of the recommendation to the provider (i.e., a new two-year contract). To manipulate participation in the CRP, the respondents assigned to the referral condition read a scenario that described them giving a recommendation: while browsing TelStar’s webpage, they were prompted to think of their friend Alex, who had just mentioned a desire for a new cel- lular provider. Because vividness contributes to the impact of recommendations on product judgments (Mangold, Miller, and Brockway 1999), we strove to make the recom- mendation articulation tangible and vivid. We asked partici- pants to verbalize their recommendation in a text box (Appendix, Condition 2a), and all participants did, using sample recommendations such as, “I recommend TelStar because I am very satisfied with the service. They are friendly and the coverage is also good,” “I recommend Tel- Star because I have been there a long time and never had any trouble,” and “I recommend TelStar because they are cheap and good.” The recommendations were similar across participants and typically consisted of one or two sentences. The scenario did not specify whether their CRP participa- tion was successful (i.e., if the noncustomer made a pur- chase). Participants in the no-referral condition read that they would have recommended the service provider but could not think of anybody looking for a new cellular telecommunication provider (Appendix, Condition 2b). This information was explicit, so any differences in the dependent loyalty measure between groups cannot be attrib- uted to the additional attitudinal information for the experi- mental group (Aronson et al. 1990). After reading the scenarios, all participants completed a short questionnaire that assessed the dependent variables and manipulation checks, using established scales adapted to our study context. We measure attitudinal loyalty with items such as “I like TelStar” (Gustafsson, Johnson, and Roos 2005), in accordance with our attitudinal loyalty defi- nition of liking and positive psychological attachment to the firm. To measure behavioral loyalty, or the act of staying with the firm or intentions thereof (Dick and Basu 1994; Oliver 1997), we asked participants whether they would stay with TelStar if it were to raise prices as well as if a competing cellular telecommunication provider offered a better service or better deal (Ganesh, Arnold, and Reynolds 2000). To test the reward size manipulation, we asked par- ticipants from the small and large reward groups to indicate the attractiveness and size of the reward offered (Ryu and Feick 2007). Finally, we asked participants how well they could imagine being in the described situation. We mea- sured all items on seven-point scales. Validity assessment. We conducted a confirmatory fac- tor analysis using IBM SPSS Amos 19.0. We assessed the Growing Existing Customers’ Revenue Streams / 25 convergent validity of attitudinal and behavioral loyalty on the basis of their factor loadings (≥.61), factor reliabilities (≥.84), and average variance extracted (≥.64) (see Table 3). All values exceeded the common thresholds. To check for discriminant validity, we used Fornell and Larcker’s (1981) criterion (see Table 3). Manipulation check. The manipulation of recommenda- tion (referral, no referral) represented a distinct variable, so we did not need to perform a manipulation check on it. However, we pretested the scenarios extensively to ensure the validity of the manipulation of CRP participation. When participants in these pretests summarized the scenario descriptions, they perceived the different scenarios as clearly distinct in terms of whether they articulated a rec- ommendation. We also confirmed that participants perceived the large reward as larger than the small reward. Participants in the large reward group regarded the reward as significantly larger (F(1, 233) = 7.0, p < .001) and more attractive (F(1, 233) = 14.3, p < .001) than did participants from the small reward group. We ensured that there was no interaction effect between reward size and participation in a CRP on perceptions of reward size (F(1, 233) = .4, p > .1) and attractiveness (F(1, 233) = .1, p > .1). The main effects of participation on perceived reward size (F(1, 233) = .5, p > .1) and attractiveness (F(1, 233) = .1, p > .1) also were non- significant. Finally, the participants indicated that they could imagine being in the described situation (M = 5.4; 1 = “not at all easy to imagine,” and 7 = “very easy to imag- TABLE 3 Scale Characteristics and Discriminant Validity (Study 2) Average Discriminant Validity b Composite Variance Behavioral Attitudinal Construct Measure Loading M (SD) Reliability Extracted Loyalty Loyalty Behavioral 2.8 (1.42) .84 .64 .80 Loyaltya If TelStar were to raise the prices, .67 I would still continue to be a customer of this provider. If a competing mobile service .87 provider were to offer a better service, I would still stay with TelStar. If a competing mobile service .85 provider were to offer a better rate or discount on their services, I would still be staying with TelStar. Attitudinal 4.05 (1.56) .84 .64 .57 .80 Loyaltya I like TelStar. .87 I take pleasure in being a customer .89 of TelStar. I am sure that TelStar is the provider .61 that takes the best care of their customers. aAgree–disagree scale (1 = “strongly disagree,” and 7 = “strongly agree”). bNumbers in boldface on the diagonal show ÷AVE. Numbers in regular type represent the construct correlation. ine”) and were satisfied with the business relationship (M = 4.6; 1 = “not at all satisfied,” and 7 = “very satisfied”). Results. We used structural equation modeling to test our hypotheses regarding the bonding process that results from voicing a recommendation. Structural equation model- ing is well suited for testing complex causal processes with experimental data (for an application, see Hennig-Thurau et al. 2006; Wagner, Hennig-Thurau, and Rudolph 2009) and has several advantages over traditional analysis of variance approaches (Bagozzi and Yi 1989). In particular, it accounts for measurement error in the latent variables and thereby reduces the chance of type II errors. In addition, it “allows for a more complete modeling of theoretical relations, whereas traditional analyses are limited to associations among measures” (Bagozzi and Yi 1989, p. 282). We chose variance-based structural equation modeling using SmartPLS software (Ringle, Wende, and Will 2005) because it “avoids many of the assumptions and chances that improper solutions will occur in LISREL analyses” (Bagozzi, Yi, and Singh 1991, p. 125). Because it tends to underestimate path coefficients compared with LISREL (Dijkstra 1983), variance-based structural equation modeling produces a conservative test of the substantive relationships. The path estimates (Figure 3) confirmed the interaction effect of participation in a CRP and reward size on attitudi- nal loyalty (.1, p < .05), as we proposed in H5. Whereas CRP participation had a nonsignificant impact (.07, p > .1) on attitudinal loyalty in the small reward situation, the inter- action produces a significant impact in the large reward sit- uation. We therefore reject H5alt, which was built on a self- perception account of the impact of the size of the reward. Reinforcement theory thus emerges as a better predictor of the impact of reward size on the link between participation in a CRP and attitudinal loyalty. In support of H3 and H4, attitu- dinal loyalty had a positive impact on behavioral loyalty (.47, p < .01) negatively moderated by participation in a CRP (–.27, p < .05). Replicating our findings from Study 1, the labora- tory experiment confirmed a positive relationship between participation in a CRP and behavioral loyalty (.26, p < .05). 26 / Journal of Marketing, July 2013 General Discussion Core Issues We organize our discussion of the results of these two studies around three core issues. First, we examine the direct impact of CRP participation on behavioral loyalty. We use results from both studies to interpret the theoretical implications. Second, we discuss the indirect impact of CRP participation on behavioral loyalty by considering how reward size and attitudinal loyalty interact with CRP participation, using the findings from Study 2. Third, we explore the influence of customer tenure on CRP, based on our results from Study 1. The subsection concludes with a review of the role of self- perception theory in CRP research. Direct impact of participation in a CRP on behavioral loyalty. The results from both studies indicate that participa- tion in a CRP directly influences the behavioral loyalty of the recommender. Study 1 demonstrates that purchase patterns are more stable and spending levels are higher among cus- tomers who participate in a CRP, in line with a commitment– consistency principle explanation, as advocated in other sit- uations in which people make their position public (Deutsch and Gerard 1955). To achieve private and public consistency, their behavior must align with the advocacy implied by their referral—in this case, continued involve- ment with the firm. These results challenge previous specu- lation that rewarded referrals have limited impact on the recommender because customers interpret their recommen- dation as less reflective of their overall positive attitude (Ryu and Feick 2007). In the path analysis of our experi- mental data, we also found that the direct impact of CRP on behavioral loyalty (.26, p < .05) was independent of reward size (.07, p > .1). Indirect impact of participation in a CRP on behavioral loyalty. In addition to the direct impact of CRP participa- tion, we considered how rewards influence firm attitude as well as the impact of participation in a CRP on the relation- ship between attitude and behavioral intentions. The impact FIGURE 3 The Bonding Process of Voicing a Recommendation *Significant at the 5% level. **Significant at the 1% level. n.s.Not significant. Reward Size small (0) vs. large (1) CRP Participation no participation (0) vs. participation (1) Attitudinal Loyalty Behavioral Loyalty H5: .10* H3: .47** H4: –.27* H1: .26 .07n.s. of rewards on attitudinal loyalty has been an issue of some contention, with competing perspectives about how cus- tomers internalize CRPs. Our findings indicate that CRP participation has a significant and positive impact on attitu- dinal loyalty for larger monetary rewards but no impact when rewards are small. This finding is consistent with a reinforcement perspective, which predicts that large rewards are more powerful in supporting positive attitude change (e.g., Leventhal 1964). However, it contrasts with self-perception explanations and the speculation that large rewards for referrals would lead customers to attribute their behavior to receiving the reward and, thus, not enhance their attitudes (Ryu and Feick 2007). Such overjustification may occur in the case of attitude-discrepant statements and behaviors, for example, as in the case of a CRP participant who, motivated by the reward, recommends the product or firm despite being dissatisfied. Attitudinal loyalty also exerted a positive impact on behavioral loyalty, consistent with prior research (e.g., Dick and Basu 2004; Gruen, Summers, and Acito 2000). The impact is moderated by participation in the CRP. This is in line with consistency and self-perception arguments, in which the need for public consistency induced by CRP participa- tion reduces the relative importance of attitudinal loyalty as a driver of behavioral loyalty. The results further indicate that attitudinal change is not a necessary condition for CRP participation to have an impact on behavioral loyalty. Role of relationship tenure. In Study 1, we determined that participation in a CRP more strongly affects shorter- tenured customers’ loyalty than longer-tenured customers’. This insight is consistent with the explanation that recom- mendations provide information about the recommenders’ own beliefs about the organization. The results also are con- sistent with the notion that people strive to appear consis- tent to others (Fazio 1987). Customers’ participation in a CRP compels them to remain with the firm or risk percep- tions that they have acted inappropriately. Longer-tenured customers instead have a history of performance on which to base their loyalty decisions, so they are less influenced by self-perception effects and the public commitment instilled by participating in a CRP. Finally, our results provide an interesting contrast on the role of self-perception theory in the study of CRPs. Con- trary to a self-perception explanation, larger rewards had a positive influence on attitudes, which implies that rewards do not serve as an external cause in explaining subsequent behavior. At the same time, the public commitment instilled by participating in CRPs provides participants an alterna- tive explanation and justification for behavioral loyalty. Although this suggests a limitation of self-perception as a unifying theory regarding recommender loyalty in CRPs, the results reflect the complex and competing psychological processes found in studies of the impact of rewards in other contexts. The controversy associated with the overjustifica- tion effect is widespread and can be observed in discordant views on the use of rewards as a motivational strategy (see Deci, Ryan, and Koestner [2001] vs. Cameron, Banko, and Pierce [2001]). In the CRP application, larger rewards seem Growing Existing Customers’ Revenue Streams / 27 to be a positive signal and buttress positive feelings about the firm, in line with a reinforcement perspective. Contributions to Theory By examining the impact of CRP participation on recom- menders, our study makes several important contributions to extant literature. Most studies of word of mouth and CRPs take a customer attraction perspective; we provide novel insights by investigating how referrals influence the recommender. In line with previous research, we demon- strate that CRP participation affects both customer churn and spending behavior; we go further by showing that CRPs influence the revenue stream of the recommender to shed light on customer loyalty determinants and contribute to the development of loyalty-based marketing strategy models (Rust, Lemon, and Zeithaml 2004). We improve understanding of loyalty by demonstrating the role of word of mouth, delivered through CRPs, in fostering loyalty. Our explanation is anchored in a commitment–consistency framework and supported by reinforcement principles (Cialdini 1971; Kelley 1973; Leventhal 1964). With our test of the impact of reward size, we help clar- ify the complex situations that emerge from scenarios involving multiple customers and the firm. In contrast with the proposition that large rewards might lead customers to think that they have acted only to gain the reward, with no predicted positive impact on customer attitudes (Ryu and Feick 2007), we find that a large reward translates into increased attitudinal loyalty and small rewards have no effect. This result contrasts with research examining the impact of reward size on the likelihood of a customer refer- ral. In that case, research has found no difference between large and small rewards (Ryu and Feick 2007). The distinc- tion is notable: small rewards seem effective in inducing the delivery of a referral, but larger rewards are required to affect the recommender’s attitude toward the firm. Investi- gations of the more complicated structure of CRPs could advance the development of marketing thought even further. The interplay between reward size, attitudinal loyalty, and behavioral loyalty reveals two routes to greater behav- ioral loyalty. First, the act of giving a recommendation affects behavioral loyalty, regardless of the reward size. Second, behavior can be influenced by the increase of atti- tudinal loyalty, though only in response to larger rewards. Greater behavioral loyalty can be supported by, but does not require, higher levels of attitudinal loyalty. These findings support the idea that participation in the CRP acts as a pub- lic commitment, and the recommender strives to act consis- tently with that advocated position. Finally, our finding that participation in a CRP has a stronger impact on shorter-tenured customers’ loyalty matches the notion that recent customers have limited infor- mation on which to base evaluations and therefore tend to behave in a consistent manner (Fazio 1987). We also might speculate that participation in a CRP reduces a shorter- tenured customer’s uncertainty about his or her attitude toward the firm. That is, customers use both valence and certainty judgments to determine their attitudes, and both may affect behavior (Chandrashekaran et al. 2007; Park et al. 2010). This reasoning suggests that when shorter- tenured customers participate in a CRP, it reduces their uncertainty about the provider in the same sense that engag- ing in word of mouth can reduce cognitive dissonance (Tax and Chandrashekaran 1992; Wangenheim and Bayón 2007b). Longer-tenured customers, who have considerable direct experience from which to derive their judgments, have stronger attitudes and are less influenced by CRP par- ticipation. Our findings thus offer an additional reason to focus on uncertainty in judgments rather than only on their positivity or negativity. Managerial Implications Referrals have long been identified as a source of new cus- tomer acquisition, especially in industries with high experi- ence and credence qualities, in which it is difficult for potential customers to evaluate the service in advance (Dobele and Lindgreen 2011). Next, we provide recommen- dations organized around four core themes for managers to support effective use of CRPs. They must (1) understand the impact and assess the return on CRPs, (2) make deci- sions on reward size, (3) accommodate target audience issues, and (4) integrate CRPs into social media strategy. Whereas prior research on CRPs has focused on their role as a vehicle to attract new customers, our research rec- ognizes their important and substantial impact on customer retention, based on our findings of the positive influence such programs have on both the attitudes and behaviors of recommenders. Reduced customer defections are central to improving profitability (Rust, Zahorik, and Keiningham 1995), and our findings show that CRPs can offer excellent returns in terms of reduced churn and increased revenue through enhanced spending over time. When combining the substantial improvements of recommenders’ lifetime revenue streams with the customer attraction benefits, firms can better understand the real return on their efforts. Given that CRPs compete with other marketing investments for scarce resources, it is important to consider their complete impact on firm profitability. The analytical approach we provide in Study 1 supports managers’ ability to understand the customer retention impact to better assess the overall returns of CRPs. The current, customer attraction–focused view of CRPs advocates designing them with smaller rewards on the basis of findings that reward size does not influence participation rates (Ryu and Feick 2007). In addition, speculation that managers should be concerned about undermining the posi- tive impact of giving word of mouth on the referring cus- tomers’ attitude if they receive more generous rewards sug- gests providing smaller payments (Ryu and Feick 2007). Our research challenges that speculation, because we find that only larger rewards have a positive influence on recom- menders’ attitudes. Therefore, if customer retention is a goal of the CRP, firms should consider larger rewards. This finding will require some experimentation to identify the amount needed to drive the retention effect. Taking customer retention into account also leads to dif- ferences in which group firms should target more closely. When customer attraction is the only goal, longer-tenured customers represent a better investment for CRPs because 28 / Journal of Marketing, July 2013 they may be stronger and more credible advocates. In the case of customer retention, firms should pay increased attention to engaging shorter-tenured customers in the pro- gram, because we found that participation has the greatest impact on reducing their churn rate. One way to support new customers’ participation in CRPs is to generate refer- rals at the time of purchase, such as by having customers identify referral prospects after initially experiencing a ser- vice. However, privacy and related risks of direct contact by the firm must be taken into consideration. Another approach (one more suitable to a variety of goods and services) would be to couple reminders of the CRP program with postpurchase satisfaction surveys to reinforce participation. Typically, CRPs encourage referrals to closer ties, such as friends and relatives, in dyadic communication (e.g., Schmitt, Skiera, and Van den Bulte 2011). Given the robust impact of these programs for customer attraction and reten- tion, we recommend that firms examine building CRPs into social media campaigns to take advantage of the increasing social commerce opportunities that take place in these set- tings (Kaplan and Haenlein 2011; Qualman 2009; Stephen and Toubia 2010). Although the implementation might involve a variety of approaches, providing customers a form of identification marker such that they can be credited by new customers as the source of the referral is essential. Given the potential magnitude of referrals that may come from a single customer in the context of social commerce, scaling rewards according to the number of referrals could be considered in designing the payouts. Limitations and Research Opportunities The limitations of this study provide several opportunities for research that further clarifies how recommendations influence customer decisions. We examined matched pairs (statistical twins) in our first study, which permitted a valid comparison of those who had and had not participated in a CRP. In addition to customer tenure, reward size, and attitu- dinal loyalty, it would be worthwhile to consider whether the loyalty effect varies by level of customer satisfaction. That is, the inclusion of satisfaction as a moderating variable could reveal how participation in CRPs affects customers with varying levels of satisfaction with the firm. We suggest studying customers who are less satisfied to determine if they are more strongly influenced by the self-perception effects of CRP participation than are highly satisfied cus- tomers, similar to the effect we found for customers with shorter tenure. In addition, further investigation of the loy- alty effect of attitude-discrepant statements or behaviors on CRP participants who recommend unsatisfactory products to obtain a referral fee could help researchers better under- stand the boundary conditions of self-perception versus reinforcement perspectives. The scenario-based experimental design in the second study enabled us to control and manipulate the variables of central interest, but it also suffered from traditional limita- tions of scenario-based studies. For example, it may not be possible to induce true attitudinal and behavioral loyalty with a fictitious scenario, because such relational variables typically need a longer time to develop. However, we designed and pretested our realistic scenario that described a relationship with the service provider; to make it more vivid, we also included graphics. Prior research has shown that the creation of relational measures is possible within such sce- narios (Homburg, Hoyer, and Koschate 2005; Palmatier et al. 2009; Wagner, Hennig-Thurau, and Rudolph 2009). In addition, we were able to replicate the loyalty effects of CRP participation with the behavioral data analysis in our first study, which increases the overall validity of our studies. We focused on successful CRP participation in Study 1; all participants who had made a referral were rewarded. However, in the case of an unsuccessful referral, the effect of the recommendation is unclear. For example, a customer who frequently recommends but rarely receives a reward due to a low conversion rate by recommendation recipients might believe that his or her effort has not been fairly rewarded, which could have a negative impact on attitudi- nal and behavioral loyalty. In this case, what impact does a recommendation have if the recommender expects but does not receive a reward? Growing Existing Customers’ Revenue Streams / 29 From a customer lifetime value perspective, it is also necessary to understand how long the loyalty effect of voic- ing a recommendation will last. Visual inspection of the revenue trajectories in Figure 2 suggests that the loyalty effect disperses at the end of our observation period, creat- ing a research opportunity for assessing the time efficacy of CRP participation. Finally, Study 2’s results confirm that CRP participation does not affect attitudinal loyalty in response to small rewards, but we cannot identify the optimal reward size. We operationalized reward size relative to the value of the rec- ommendation to the firm. Thus, the €5 reward seemed small, because the new customer’s purchase of a long-term contract represents a large gain for the firm in terms of cus- tomer lifetime value. Receiving €5 for recommending a less expensive purchase, such as a restaurant or a prepaid contract without a minimum spending level, may be ade- quate. Further research should examine the conditions for establishing an adequate reward size and thereby develop optimal reward schemes for firms. Chandrashekaran, Murali, Kristin Rotte, Stephen S. Tax, and Rajdeep Grewal (2007), “Satisfaction Strength and Customer Loyalty,” Journal of Marketing Research, 44 (February), 153–63. Chew, Patricia (2006), “Do Recommend-a-Friend Programs Really Work?” doctoral dissertation, National University of Singapore. Cialdini, Robert B. (1971), “Attitudinal Advocacy in the Verbal Conditioner,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 17 (3), 350–58. Cox, David R. (1972), “Regression Models and Life-Tables,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 34 (2), 187–220. D’Agostino, Ralph B. (1998), “Tutorial in Biostatistics: Propen- sity Score Methods for Bias Reduction in the Comparison of a Treatment to a Non-Randomized Control Group,” Statistics in Medicine, 17 (19), 2265–81. Davidow, Moshe (2003), “Have You Heard the Word? The Effect of Word of Mouth on Perceived Justice, Satisfaction and Repurchase Intentions Following Complaint Handling,” Jour- nal of Consumer Satisfaction, Dissatisfaction and Complaining Behavior, 16, 67–80. Deci, Edward L., Richard M. Ryan, and Richard Koestner (2001), “The Pervasive Negative Effects of Rewards on Intrinsic Moti- vation: Response to Cameron (2001),” Review of Educational Research, 71 (1), 43–51. Dehejia, Rajeev H. and Sadek Wahba (1999), “Causal Effects in Nonexperimental Studies: Reevaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs,” Journal of the American Statistical Asso- ciation, 94 (448), 1053–62. ——— and ——— (2002), “Propensity Score-Matching Methods for Nonexperimental Causal Studies,” Review of Economics & Statistics, 84 (1), 151–61. Deutsch, Morton and Harold B. Gerard (1955), “A Study of Nor- mative and Informational Social Influences upon Individual Judgment,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51 (3), 629–36. Dick, Alan S. and Kunal Basu (1994), “Customer Loyalty: Toward an Integrated Conceptual Framework,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 22 (2), 99–113. Dijkstra, Theo (1983), “Some Comments on Maximum Likeli- hood and Partial Least Squares Methods,” Journal of Econo- metrics, 22 (1/2), 67–90. REFERENCES Aronson, Elliot (2004), “Dissonance, Hypocrisy, and the Self- Concept,” in Readings About the Social Animal, Vol. 9, Elliot Aronson, ed. New York: Worth Publishers, 103–126. ———, Phoebe C. Ellsworth, J. Merrill Carlsmith, and Marti Hope Gonzales (1990), Methods of Research in Social Psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill. Bachman, Wallace and Richard D. Katzev (1982), “The Effects of Non-Contingent Free Bus Tickets and Personal Commitment on Urban Bus Ridership,” Transportation Research, 16 (2), 103–108. Bagozzi, Richard P. and Youjae Yi (1989), “On the Use of Struc- tural Equation Models in Experimental Designs,” Journal of Marketing Research, 26 (August), 271–84. ———, ———, and Surrendra Singh (1991), “On the Use of Struc- tural Equation Models in Experimental Designs: Two Exten- sions,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 8 (2), 125–40. Bem, Daryl (1972), “Self-Perception Theory,” in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 6, L. Berkowitz, ed. New York: Academic Press, 1–62. Biyalogorsky, Eyal, Eitan Gerstner, and Barak Libai (2001), “Cus- tomer Referral Management: Optimal Reward Programs,” Marketing Science, 20 (1), 82–95. Blau, Peter M. (1967), Exchange and Power in Social Life. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Bolton, Ruth N. (1998), “A Dynamic Model of the Duration of the Customer’s Relationship with a Continuous Service Provider: The Role of Satisfaction,” Marketing Science, 17 (1), 45–65. Burger, Jerry M. (1999), “The Foot-in-the-Door Compliance Pro- cedure: A Multiple-Process Analysis and Review,” Personality & Social Psychology Review, 3 (4), 303–325. Caliendo, Marco and Sabine Kopeinig (2008), “Some Practical Guidance for the Implementation of Propensity Score Match- ing,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 22 (1), 31–72. Cameron, Judy, Katherine M. Banko, and W. David Pierce (2001), “Pervasive Negative Effects of Rewards on Intrinsic Motiva- tion: The Myth Continues,” The Behavior Analyst, 24 (1), 1–44. Chaiken, Shelly and Mark W. Baldwin (1981), “Affective-Cognitive Consistency and the Effect of Salient Behavioral Information on the Self-Perception of Attitudes,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 41 (1), 1–12. Dobele, Angela and Adam Lindgreen (2011), “Exploring the Nature of Value in the Word-of-Mouth Referral Equation for Health Care,” Journal of Marketing Management, 27 (3/4), 269–90. East, Robert, Kathy Hammond, and Malcolm Wright (2007), “The Relative Incidence of Positive and Negative Word of Mouth: A Multi-Category Study,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 24 (2), 175–84. ———, Wendy Lomax, and Radhika Narain (2001), “Customer Tenure, Recommendation and Switching,” Journal of Con- sumer Satisfaction, Dissatisfaction and Complaining Behavior, 14, 46–54. ———, Jenni Romaniuk, and Wendy Lomax (2011), “The NPS and the ACSI: A Critique and an Alternative Metric,” International Journal of Market Research, 53 (3), 327–46. Engel, James F., Robert J. Kegerreis, and Roger D. Blackwell (1969), “Word-of-Mouth Communication by the Innovator,” Journal of Marketing, 33 (July), 15–19. Fazio, Russell H. (1987), “Self-Perception Theory: A Current Per- spective,” in Social Influence: The Ontario Symposium, Vol. 5, Mark P. Zanna, James M. Olson, and C. Peter Herman, eds. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 129–50. ———, Paul M. Herr, and Timothy J. Olney (1984), “Attitude Accessibility Following a Self-Perception Process,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47 (2), 277–86. ———, Mark P. Zanna, and Joel Cooper (1977), “Dissonance and Self-Perception: An Integrative View of Each Theory’s Proper Domain of Application,” Journal of Experimental Social Psy- chology, 13 (5), 464–79. Fornell, Claes and David F. Larcker (1981), “Evaluating Structural Equation Models with Unobservable Variables and Measure- ment Error,” Journal of Marketing Research, 18 (February), 39–50. Fullerton, Gordon (2003), “When Does Commitment Lead to Loyalty?” Journal of Service Research, 5 (4), 333–44. Ganesh, Jaishankar, Mark J. Arnold, and Kristy E. Reynolds (2000), “Understanding the Customer Base of Service Providers: An Examination of the Differences Between Switchers and Stay- ers,” Journal of Marketing, 64 (July), 65–87. Garnefeld, Ina, Sabrina Helm, and Andreas Eggert (2011), “Walk Your Talk: An Experimental Investigation of the Relationship Between Word of Mouth and Communicators’ Loyalty,” Jour- nal of Service Research, 14 (1), 93–107. Gomez, Blanca G., Anna G. Arranz, and Jesús G. Cillan (2006), “The Role of Loyalty Programs in Behavioral and Affective Loyalty,” Journal of Consumer Marketing, 23 (7), 387–96. Greenwald, Anthony G., Catherine G. Carnot, Rebecca Beach, and Barbara Young (1987), “Increasing Voting Behavior by Asking People if They Expect to Vote,” Journal of Applied Psychol- ogy, 72 (2), 315–18. Gruen, Thomas W., John O. Summers, and Frank Acito (2000), “Relationship Marketing Activities, Commitment, and Mem- bership Behaviors in Professional Associations,” Journal of Marketing, 64 (July), 34–49. Gustafsson, Anders, Michael D. Johnson, and Inger Roos (2005), “The Effects of Customer Satisfaction, Relationship Commit- ment Dimensions, and Triggers on Customer Retention,” Jour- nal of Marketing, 69 (October), 210–18. Hansen, Havard, Kare Sandvik, and Fred Selnes (2003), “Direct and Indirect Effects of Commitment to a Service Employee on the Intention to Stay,” Journal of Service Research, 5 (4), 356–68. Hennig-Thurau, Thorsten, Markus Groth, Michael Paul, and Dwayne D. Gremler (2006), “Are All Smiles Created Equal? How Emotional Contagion and Emotional Labor Affect Ser- vice Relationships,” Journal of Marketing, 70 (July), 58–73. Higgins, E. Tory and William S. Rholes (1978), “Saying Is Believ- ing: Effects of Message Modification on Memory and Liking for the Person Described,” Journal of Experimental Social Psy- chology, 14 (7), 363–78. Hitt, Lorin M. and Frances X. Frei (2002), “Do Better Customers Utilize Electronic Distribution Channels? The Case of PC Banking,” Management Science, 48 (6), 732–48. Homburg, Christian, Wayne D. Hoyer, and Nicole Koschate (2005), “Customers’ Reactions to Price Increases: Do Cus- tomer Satisfaction and Perceived Motive Fairness Matter?” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 33 (1), 36–49. Kaplan, Andreas M. and Michael Haenlein (2011), “Two Hearts in Three-Quarter Time: How to Waltz the Social Media/Viral Marketing Dance,” Business Horizons, 54 (3), 253–63. Katzev, Richard D. and Anton U. Pardini (1987), “The Compara- tive Effectiveness of Reward and Commitment Approaches in Motivating Community Recycling,” Journal of Environmental Systems, 17 (2), 93–113. Kelley, Harold H. (1973), “The Processes of Causal Attribution,” American Psychologist, 28 (2), 107–128. ——— and John W. Thibaut (1978), Interpersonal Relations: A Theory of Interdependence. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Kiesler, Charles A. (1971), The Psychology of Commitment: Experiments Linking Behavior to Belief. New York: Academic Press. ——— and Joseph Sakumara (1966), “A Test of a Model for Com- mitment,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 3 (3), 349–53. Kornish, Laura J. and Qiuping Li (2010), “Optimal Referral Bonuses with Asymmetric Information: Firm-Offered and Interpersonal Incentives,” Marketing Science, 29 (1), 108–121. Krosnick, Jon A., David S. Boninger, Yao C. Chuang, Matthew K. Berent, and Catherine G. Camot (1993), “Attitude Strength: One Construct or Many Related Constructs?” Journal of Per- sonality and Social Psychology, 65 (6), 1132–51. LaLonde, Robert J. (1986), “Evaluating the Econometric Evalua- tions of Training Programs with Experimental Data,” American Economic Review, 76 (4), 604–621. Leventhal, Gerald S. (1964), “Reward Magnitude, Task Attractive- ness, and Liking for Instrumental Activity,” Journal of Abnor- mal and Social Psychology, 68 (4), 460–63. Mangold, W. Glynn, Fred Miller, and Gary R. Brockway (1999), “Word-of-Mouth Communication in the Service Marketplace,” Journal of Services Marketing, 13 (1), 73–89. Marks, Lawrence J. and Michael A. Kamins (1988), “The Use of Product Sampling and Advertising: Effects of Sequence of Exposure and Degree of Advertising Claim Exaggeration on Consumers’ Belief Strength, Belief Confidence, and Attitudes,” Journal of Marketing Research, 25 (August), 266–81. Mooney, Kelly and Nita Rollins (2008), The Open Brand: When Push Comes to Pull in a Web-Made World. Berkeley, CA: New Riders. Moriarty, Thomas (1975), “Crime, Commitment, and the Respon- sive Bystander: Two Field Experiments,” Journal of Personal- ity and Social Psychology, 31 (2), 370–76. Nitzan, Irit and Barak Libai (2011), “Social Effects on Customer Retention,” Journal of Marketing, 75 (November), 24–38. Nyer, Prashanth U. and Stephanie Dellande (2010), “Public Com- mitment as a Motivator for Weight Loss,” Psychology & Mar- keting, 27 (1), 1–12. ——— and Mahesh Gopinath (2005), “Effects of Complaining vs. Negative Word-of-Mouth on Subsequent Changes in Satisfac- tion: The Role of Public Commitment,” Psychology & Market- ing, 22 (12), 937–53. Oliver, Richard L. (1997), Satisfaction: A Behavioral Perspective on the Consumer. New York: McGraw-Hill. Pallak, Michael S., David A. Cook, and John J. Sullivan (1980), “Commitment and Energy Conservation,” in Applied Social Psychology Annual, Vol. 1, Leonard Bickman, ed. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 235–53. 30 / Journal of Marketing, July 2013 Palmatier, Robert W., Cheryl Burke Jarvis, Jennifer Bechkoff, and Frank R. Kardes (2009), “The Role of Customer Gratitude in Relationship Marketing,” Journal of Marketing, 73 (Septem- ber), 1–18. Park, C. Whan, Deborah J. MacInnis, Joseph Priester, Andreas B. Eisingerich, and Dawn Iacobucci (2010), “Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength: Conceptual and Empirical Differ- entiation of Two Critical Brand Equity Drivers,” Journal of Marketing, 74 (November), 1–17. Qualman, Eric (2009), Socialnomics: How Social Media Trans- forms the Way We Live and Do Business. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Rajagopal, Priyali and Nicole Votolato Montgomery (2011), “I Imagine, I Experience, I Like: The False Experience Effect,” Journal of Consumer Research, 38 (3), 578–59. Rässler, Susanne (2002), Statistical Matching: A Frequentist Theory, Practical Applications and Alternative Bayesian Approaches. Berlin: Springer. Reinartz, Werner and V. Kumar (2003), “The Impact of Customer Relationship Characteristics on Profitable Lifetime Duration,” Journal of Marketing, 67 (January), 77–99. Ringle, Christian M., Sven Wende, and Alexander Will (2005), “SmartPLS 2.0,” (accessed March 26, 2013), [available at http://www.smartpls.de]. Rosenbaum, Paul R. and Donald B. Rubin (1983), “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational Studies for Causal Effects,” Biometrika, 70 (1), 41–55. ——— and ——— (1985), “Constructing a Control Group Using Multivariate Matched Sampling Models That Incorporate the Propensity Score,” American Statistician, 39 (1), 33–38. Rubin, Donald B. and Neal Thomas (2000), “Matching Using Estimated Propensity Scores: Relating Theory to Practice,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95 (450), 573–85. Rust, Roland T., Katherine N. Lemon, and Valarie A. Zeithaml (2004), “Return on Marketing: Using Customer Equity to Focus Marketing Strategy,” Journal of Marketing, 68 (Janu- ary), 109–127. ———, Anthony J. Zahorik, and Timothy L. Keiningham (1995), “Return on Quality (ROQ): Making Service Quality Finan- cially Accountable,” Journal of Marketing, 59 (April), 58–70. Ryu, Gangseog and Lawrence F. Feick (2007), “A Penny for Your Thoughts: Referral Reward Programs and Referral Likeli- hood,” Journal of Marketing, 71 (January), 84–94. Schmitt, Philipp, Bernd Skiera, and Christophe Van den Bulte (2011), “Referral Programs and Customer Value,” Journal of Marketing, 75 (January), 46–59. Growing Existing Customers’ Revenue Streams / 31 Silverman, Bernard W. (1986), Density Estimation: For Statistics and Data Analysis. London: Chapman and Hall. Smith, Herbert L. (1997), “Matching with Multiple Controls to Estimate Treatment Effects in Observational Studies,” Socio- logical Methodology, 27 (1), 325–53. Stephen, Andrew T. and Olivier Toubia (2010), “Deriving Value from Social Commerce Networks,” Journal of Marketing Research, 47 (April), 215–28. Tax, Stephen S. and Murali Chandrashekaran (1992), “Consumer Decision Making Following a Failed Service Encounter: A Pilot Study,” Journal of Consumer Satisfaction, Dissatisfaction and Complaining Behavior, 5, 55–68. Tietje, Brian C. (2002), “When Do Rewards Have Enhancement Effects? An Availability Valence Approach,” Journal of Con- sumer Psychology, 12 (4), 363–73. Vaidyanathan, Rajiv and Praveen Aggarwal (2005), “Using Com- mitments to Drive Consistency: Enhancing the Effectiveness of Cause-Related Marketing Communications,” Journal of Mar- keting Communications, 11 (4), 231–46. Verhoef, Peter C. (2003), “Understanding the Effect of Customer Relationship Management Efforts on Customer Retention and Customer Share Development,” Journal of Marketing, 67 (October), 30–45. Wagner, Tillmann, Thorsten Hennig-Thurau, and Thomas Rudolph (2009), “Does Customer Demotion Jeopardize Loyalty?” Jour- nal of Marketing, 73 (May), 69–85. Wangenheim, Florian v. and Tomás Bayón (2007a), “Behavioral Consequences of Overbooking Service Capacity,” Journal of Marketing, 71 (October), 36–47. ——— and ——— (2007b), “The Chain from Customer Satisfac- tion via Word-of-Mouth Referrals to New Customer Acquisi- tion,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 35 (2), 233–49. Westbrook, Robert A. (1987), “Product/Consumption-Based Affective Responses and Postpurchase Processes,” Journal of Marketing Research, 24 (August), 258–70. Wirtz, Jochen and Patricia Chew (2002), “The Effects of Incen- tives, Deal Proneness, Satisfaction and Tie Strength on Word- of-Mouth Behaviour,” International Journal of Service Indus- try Management, 13 (2), 141–62. Yi, Youjae and Hoseong Jeon (2003), “Effects of Loyalty Pro- grams on Value Perception, Program Loyalty, and Brand Loy- alty,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 31 (3), 229–40. 32 / Journal of Marketing, July 2013 That is how easy it works: Just write an email to your friends and tell them about our offer. You will receive 5 ! when your friend signs up for any contract at TelStar. (valid for any long-term contract, invalid for Pre-Paid). Recommend now! Dear customers, take part in the refer a friend program and earn 5!! Careers / Press Center / Site notice / Terms and conditions / Privacy policy / Contact us TelStar Private Customers Business Customers My TelStar The Company TelStar Send Send an email to your friend and recommend TelStar! Hello Alex, I recommend TelStar to you because ______________________________ ______________________________ ______________________________ Recommendation: alex1982@gmx.de Alex To: Email adress: Private Customers Business Customers My TelStar The Company Careers / Press Center / Site notice / Terms and conditions / Privacy policy / Contact us yc That is how easy it works: Just write an email to your friends and tell them about our offer. You will receive 50 ! when your friend signs up for any contract at TelStar. (valid for any long-term contract, invalid for Pre-Paid). Recommend now! Dear customers, take part in the refer a friend program and earn 50 !! Careers / Press Center / Site notice / Terms and conditions / Privacy policy / Contact us TelStar Private Customers Business Customers My TelStar The Company TelStar Send Send an email to your friend and recommend TelStar! ______________________________ ______________________________ ______________________________ ______________________________ ______________________________ Recommendation:To: Email adress: Private Customers Business Customers My TelStar The Company Careers / Press Center / Site notice / Terms and conditions / Privacy policy / Contact us d o e r u : B o B o e o 5 APPENDIX Study 2 Manipulations Condition 1: Reward A: Small Reward Condition B: Large Reward Condition Condition 2: Participation in Customer Referral Program A: Referral Condition B: No Referral Condition While surfing on the TelStar webpage, you think of your friend Alex, who is currently looking for a new provider. You decide to recommend TelStar to your friend. (Please fill in the text box.) You would like to recommend the service provider TelStar. owever, at the moment, you cannot think of anybody looking for a new service provider. That is why you do not recommend TelStar.