Gilbride_JournMarket_2015_ylY4.pdf
aBUr8AP__Mhm1jv0SjRMKPYXAjuG-Gilbride_JournMarket_2015_ylY4.pdf.plain.html

Timothy J. Gilbride, J. Jeffrey Inman, & Karen Melville Stilley The Role of Within-Trip Dynamics in Unplanned Versus Planned Purchase Behavior The recent surge in the importance of shopper marketing has led to an increased need to understand the drivers of unplanned purchases. The authors address this issue by examining how elements of the current shopping trip (e.g., lagged unplanned purchase, cumulative purchases) and previous shopping trips (e.g., average historical price paid by the shopper) determine unplanned versus planned purchases on the current trip. Using a grocery field study and frequent-shopper-program data, the authors estimate competing models to test behavioral hypotheses using a hierarchical Bayesian probit model with state dependence and serially correlated errors. The results indicate that shoppers with smaller trip budgets tend to exhibit behavior consistent with a self-regulation model (i.e., an unplanned purchase decreases the probability of a subsequent unplanned vs. planned purchase), but this effect reverses later in the trip. In contrast, shoppers with medium-sized trip budgets tend to exhibit behavior consistent with a cuing theory model (i.e., an unplanned purchase increases the probability of a subsequent unplanned vs. planned purchase), and this effect increases as the trip continues. The article concludes with a discussion of implications for research and practice. Keywords: shopper marketing, in-store decision making, self-regulation, cuing theory, autocorrelated probit models Online Supplement: http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jm.13.0286 Timothy J. Gilbride is Associate Professor and Notre Dame Chair in Mar- keting, Mendoza College of Business, University of Notre Dame (e-mail: tgilbrid@ nd.edu). J. Jeffrey Inman is the Albert Wesley Frey Professor of Marketing and Associate Dean for Research and Faculty, Katz Graduate School of Business, University of Pittsburgh (e-mail: jinman@katz.pitt. edu). Karen Melville Stilley is a principal at Market Rise Consulting (e-mail: marketrise.consulting@gmail.com). The authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order. They thank the JM review team, whose comments and suggestions improved the article. Kusum Ailawadi served as area editor for this article. © 2015, American Marketing Association ISSN: 0022-2429 (print), 1547-7185 (electronic) Journal of Marketing Vol. 79 (May 2015), 57 –7357 Consumers are increasingly able to avoid or tune outadvertising in traditional media, and thus, shoppermarketing has experienced marked gains in resources at consumer packaged goods firms (Hein 2008; Lucas 2012). Unplanned purchases are an important out- come of shopper marketing due to the potential for incre- mental profits for both retailers and manufacturers; conse- quently, in-store decision making has garnered an associated spike in interest in academic research. Recent research has examined budget deviation (Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield 2010a), browsing and shopping (Hui, Brad- low, and Fader 2009), social influences (Zhang et al. 2014), and factors that influence unplanned purchases and spend- ing (Bell, Corsten, and Knox 2011; Hui, Inman, et al. 2013; Inman, Winer, and Ferraro 2009). Despite the recent increase in research focused on the factors that drive unplanned purchases, significant gaps remain. For example, prior research on in-store decision making has employed a survey-based, overall trip–level approach. That is, unplanned purchase behavior has largely been studied as a static behavior that remains constant throughout the duration of the trip (Bell, Corsten, and Knox 2011; Inman, Winer, and Ferraro 2009; Park, Iyer, and Smith 1989). In this research, we address this issue using a unique data set that merges frequent-shopper-program (FSP) data with a field study in a supermarket setting. Our research extends prior research on in-store decision making by examining within-trip dynamic effects on unplanned versus planned purchase behavior. Recent research in sequential choice has shown that prior decisions and choices can influence subsequent decisions (e.g., Dhar, Huber, and Khan 2007; Khan and Dhar 2006; Vohs and Faber 2007), suggesting that unplanned purchase behavior probably does not remain constant throughout the trip. These findings prompt the question of what this pattern might be and how it might evolve during the trip. Two theories of interchoice behavior are pertinent to this ques- tion. On the one hand, most prior research on in-store deci- sion making has applied self-regulation theory to predict that an unplanned purchase will decrease the probability of the subsequent purchase being unplanned, because shop- pers try to exert self-control and avoid yielding to tempta- tion (e.g., Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield 2010a). As self- regulation resources become depleted, it is more difficult to maintain self-control (Muraven and Baumeister 2000), and this effect may actually reverse later in the trip. On the other hand, a typical grocery store is rife with potential cues that may spur shoppers to recall items that they did not plan to buy (Inman and Winer 1998). To the extent that shoppers are receptive to such in-store cues, cuing theory (Lynch and Srull 1982) predicts that an unplanned purchase will increase the probability of the subsequent purchase being unplanned because the unplanned selection may cue other forgotten needs. Relatedly, we examine whether choosing a hedonic (vs. utilitarian) item influences the subsequent purchase deci- sion. Understanding how prior purchases within a shopping trip affect the nature of subsequent purchases is important for designing in-store programs and store layout. We also assess whether a consumer’s past purchase history can be used to help differentiate which items will be planned versus unplanned on the current shopping trip. This is of increas- ing interest to retailers and manufacturers alike, given the importance of getting on the shopping list (Symphony IRI Group 2012). Inman, Winer, and Ferraro (2009) begin to address this issue by examining how unplanned purchase likelihood varies with product characteristics such as cate- gory interpurchase time. Whereas they were restricted to using population averages, in this article, we leverage FSP data to examine the usefulness of shopper-level FSP infor- mation. Specifically, we examine the effect on planned ver- sus unplanned purchases of a shopper’s historical average price paid in the category as well as the shopper’s fre- quency and recency of purchases in each product category. Our research makes two contributions to the literature on in-store decision making and offers useful implications for shopper marketing practice. First, and most important, we show that unplanned purchases during a shopping trip are state dependent, but the nature of this state dependency evolves over the course of the shopping trip and differs between shoppers. Specifically, we assess the conditions under which the carryover effect predictions of self-regulation theory and cuing theory apply and how they evolve during the trip. Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield (2010a) find that consumers have mental budgets for planned and unplanned items. These authors then use self-regulation theory to describe the deviation between total planned and actual spending for the entire shopping trip. In another study, Stil- ley, Inman, and Wakefield (2010b) extend this analysis and examine the total amount spent on planned versus unplanned items as a function of promotional savings real- ized before and after the unplanned budget is exhausted. This process again relies on self-regulatory theory. Both these analyses focus on differences between consumers at the overall trip level. In contrast, our research tests whether self-regulation or cuing theory describes shopping behavior during the trip. If self-regulation or cuing theories are valid, we should observe an incremental increase in the probabil- ity of making an unplanned versus planned selection on an item-by-item basis within shopper as the trip progresses. This is a core contribution of our research. Consistent with our predictions, we find that for shop- pers with a smaller trip budget (less than $64 in our data set), an unplanned purchase decreases the probability that the subsequent purchase will be unplanned versus planned, but this effect reverses over the course of the shopping trip. 58 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 These results are compatible with self-regulation theory (e.g., Baumeister and Heatherton 1996). For shoppers with medium-sized trip budgets ($64–$109), an unplanned selec- tion increases the probability that the next selection will also be unplanned, and this effect grows stronger over the course of the trip. This is congruent with cuing theory (Lynch and Srull 1982). Large-trip-budget (>$109) shop- pers do not change their behavior as the result of an unplanned purchase, suggesting that they are not as mindful of whether their selections are planned versus unplanned. We also find that category hedonicity is inversely related to the subsequent likelihood of an unplanned purchase when a shopper makes a planned purchase, offering field evidence of the licensing effect that was not supported by Hui, Brad- low, and Fader (2009). Secondarily, similar to Kumar et al. (2008), who use customer sales data to select customers for targeting and to assess the optimal allocation of resources to the selected customers, we demonstrate that a shopper’s purchase his- tory (commonly available from FSP data) can be used to identify planned versus unplanned purchases on the current trip. We find that unplanned purchases are less likely for higher-priced categories, for categories that are frequently purchased, and for items that have not been purchased recently. These findings are an important first step in being able to (1) develop a tailored shopping list for each shopper on the basis of individual shopping history and (2) add potentially unplanned items to the shopping list. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. We first integrate relevant streams of behavioral literature to make predictions regarding the impact of both in-store dynamic effects and shopper purchase history on unplanned versus planned purchase likelihood. We then detail the data and statistical model and present the results. We conclude with a discussion of the implications of our findings for research and practice. Conceptual Background We use several streams of research to guide our understand- ing of a shopper’s item-by-item selection of planned versus unplanned items. We begin with self-regulation behavior and cuing theory, followed by a discussion of the licensing effect and the FSP-based variables. Hoch and Lowenstein (1991) formulate the consumer’s problem as one of conflict between desire for goods versus the willpower to maintain and achieve broader goals. Research has suggested that shoppers have distinct goals for shopping trips (e.g., a “fill- in” trip, a “weekly replenishment” trip; Bell, Corsten, and Knox 2011), plans to purchase specific items and/or brands from a category, and a budget for planned and unplanned items (Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield 2010a, b). Park, Iyer, and Smith (1989, p. 423) define unplanned purchases as “the purchase of a product that was not planned prior to entering the store.” Researchers have described unplanned purchases as items the shopper simply forgot to put on the list or enumerate before entering the store or as items the shopper recognizes as needs or wants after entering the store. This latter category includes items for which the con- sumer experiences a sudden, unreflective urge or impulse to buy (Rook 1987). Regardless of whether the item is a for- gotten need or a want prompted by the shopping experi- ence, the shopper must balance the desire for many differ- ent products while keeping to the substantive and economic goals of the shopping trip. Dynamics of Unplanned Purchases Walking through a grocery store, a shopper is confronted with many more unplanned than planned items for potential purchase. Both self-regulation and cuing theory suggest that unplanned purchases are dynamic over the course of the shopping trip. We consider two types of dynamics: (1) carry- over effects from earlier purchases on subsequent unplanned versus planned purchases and (2) the change in the probability of making an unplanned versus a planned purchase over the course of the shopping trip. Recognizing the role of self-regulation, Inman, Winer, and Ferraro (2009) identify several strategies a shopper might employ to limit unplanned purchases, including using a shopping list, shopping only in aisles where planned items are located, and limiting the amount of time spent shopping. Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield (2010a) demonstrate that self-regulation concepts such as shopper impulsiveness and resource depletion in the form of how long a consumer has shopped are associated with aggregate unplanned pur- chases. In contrast, we consider the applicability of self- regulation theory to the sequence of specific selections made by a shopper. Self-regulation. Baumeister and Heatherton (1996) review the three components of self-regulation. First, there must be a goal or set of standards that represents some desired state. Second, there must be monitoring consisting of some sort of comparison of the current state with the desired state. In the context of grocery shopping, the exis- tence of mental trip budgets and consumers’ ability to stay reasonably close to those budgets suggests that there is goal setting and monitoring. Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield’s (2010a) study shows that shoppers had an average mental budget for the shopping trip of $58.46 with an average amount spent of $58.93, while in another study, they report an average budget of $66.45 and spending of $69.84 (Stil- ley, Inman, and Wakefield 2010b). The third component of the self-regulation model is what Sayette (2004) refers to as “altering responses”— actions taken when the current state falls short of the stan- dard or desired state. The monitoring and response elements of the self-regulation model suggest that when a shopper makes an unplanned purchase, it will decrease the probabil- ity of a subsequent unplanned purchase as the shopper aims to maintain an overall budgetary goal for the trip. In Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield (2010a, b), before beginning their shopping trips, consumers had budgeted $17.35 and $20.37, respectively, to unplanned purchases. Because these amounts are less than the amount budgeted for planned items, to stay within the overall budget, an effective altering response would be to resist the attraction of a subsequent unplanned purchase. The Role of Within-Trip Dynamics / 59 However, self-regulation theory suggests that a shop- per’s ability to stick to budgetary and other shopping objec- tives may change over time due to self-depletion of regula- tory resources. During a shopping trip, shoppers are exposed to numerous environmental factors that have been shown to decrease self-control performance, such as noise (Glass, Singer, and Friedman 1969; Hartley 1973), crowd- ing (Evans 1979; Sherrod 1974), and proximity to a tempt- ing product (e.g., Vohs and Heatherton 2000). As more items are purchased, self-regulation depletion is likely (for a review of self-regulation depletion, see Muraven and Baumeister 2000). This suggests that the likelihood of an altering response decreases as the shopping trip continues. Will a shopper’s behavior change when he or she exceeds the expected expenditures on a shopping trip? To avoid going over the trip budget by a greater amount, shop- pers may stick to their enumerated list and forgo any addi- tional unplanned purchases. However, if resource depletion increases as the trip progresses, this decreases self-control and increases the probability of goal abandonment (Cochran and Tesser 1996; Soman and Cheema 2004). Thus, at some point in the shopping trip, an unplanned selection may actually increase the probability that the next selection will be unplanned as opposed to planned. Cuing theory. Park, Iyer, and Smith (1989) suggest an alternative to self-regulation theory. They argue that more active cognitive processing during the shopping trip will lead to more unplanned purchases because the active pro- cessing triggers forgotten wants or needs. Consumers have limited processing capability (Miller 1956) and therefore often rely on cues that aid in retrieval from memory (Bettman 1979; Lynch and Srull 1982). The associative net- work model suggests that an unplanned selection may cue other forgotten needs (Collins and Loftus 1975; Ratcliff and McKoon 1988) and, thus, increase the probability that sub- sequent selections will also be unplanned (vs. planned). That is, cuing theory suggests the opposite of the altering response proposed by self-regulation theory. The longer a shopper is in the store and exposed to more items, the greater the probability that the shopper will be exposed to items that cue a forgotten want or need. Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield (2010a) report that time in the store is positively related to unplanned purchasing (moderated by the shopper’s mental budget for unplanned purchases), but they attribute this finding to self-regulation resource deple- tion. However, previous analyses were conducted at the trip level—and therefore, between consumers—whereas our research focuses on within-consumer analysis and how planned versus unplanned purchasing changes over the course of the shopping trip. Both cuing theory and self-regulation theory suggest that the effect of an unplanned purchase will change over the course of the shopping trip and that unplanned versus planned purchases are more likely later in the trip. Cuing theory implies that an unplanned purchase will trigger other wants and needs, leading to an increased probability that the next selection will be unplanned as opposed to planned. As the shopping trip progresses, more needs are cued and more unplanned purchases are made. Self-regulation theory sug- gests that shoppers will engage in altering responses to stick to the substantive and economic goals of the shopping trip. In this case, an unplanned purchase will increase the probability of a planned purchase on the next selection as the shopper reverts back to planned purchases. However, as the result of resource depletion, the reaction to making an unplanned purchase should change as the shopping trip continues. Although both theories predict that an unplanned purchase is more likely to prompt an additional unplanned purchase as the trip progresses, cuing theory and self-regulation theory differ on early reactions to unplanned purchases. Importantly, we argue that the shopper’s purpose for the trip influences whether cuing theory or self-regulation theory explains shopper behavior. Bell, Corsten, and Knox (2011) show that the more abstract the goal of the shopping trip, the greater the total number of unplanned purchases. To the extent that a shopper has a well-defined purpose, such as shopping for immediate consumption or for meals for the same day (Bell, Corsten, and Knox 2011), the shop- ping trip will be more goal directed, and we expect the self- regulation model to be more descriptive. However, when a shopper is on a larger shopping trip with less well-defined goals, he or she should be more open to in-store cues (i.e., cuing theory better fits this behavior). In our analysis, we use each shopper’s overall a priori planned budget for the shopping trip as a proxy for the shopping goal to test our prediction that the dynamics of unplanned purchases differ between shoppers. The Licensing Effect Research has shown that hedonic items are more likely to be unplanned because they yield more positive affect than functional items and therefore are more commonly pur- chased on impulse (Inman, Winer, and Ferraro 2009; Shiv and Fedorikhin 1999). However, this research is silent regarding potential carryover effects. Our examination of the literature suggests that the less hedonic an item is, the more likely the shopper should be to buy an unplanned ver- sus a planned item on the subsequent purchase. According to the licensing effect (Khan and Dhar 2006), making a virtuous decision licenses people to subsequently make a more indulgent choice by boosting their self-concept. In the goal literature, Dhar and Simonson (1999) find that consumers tend to balance goals when trading off between two conflicting goals (eating something that is healthy vs. tasty), which suggests that deciding to purchase a healthy but less tasty alternative should lead to increased likelihood of subsequently selecting a more hedonic, unplanned item. Likewise, Fishbach and Dhar (2005) find that when con- sumers have conflicting goals that they pursue over time, even perceived lack of progress on the focal goal (e.g., eat- ing healthy) can lead to disengagement. Applying a self- control depletion argument suggests the same outcome. A consumer who exerts self-control in the process of making a virtuous choice will deplete self-control (Muraven and Baumeister 2000) and therefore will have less willpower remaining to resist making an unplanned purchase on the next selection. 60 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 Despite the apparent robust support for this effect, Hui, Bradlow, and Fader (2009) did not find that a virtuous bas- ket affected subsequent likelihood of purchasing a relative vice. Instead, they found only weak support for increased shopping of zones that contained vice items. We revisit this issue by considering the more immediate impact of the prior purchase’s hedonicity on subsequent likelihood of making an unplanned versus a planned purchase. Shopper-Level FSP-Based Factors Retailers’ FSPs enable them to track shoppers’ purchases over time. The FSP data from the retailer that participated in this study capture category and brand purchased, price paid, quantity purchased, and date of purchase. Whereas Inman, Winer, and Ferraro (2009) use an industry benchmark to include average interpurchase cycle in their model of unplanned purchase, our use of a shopper’s own purchase history to describe the category characteristics is new to the literature. Specifically, we assess the effect of each shop- per’s average price paid in the category and the frequency and recency of category purchase. We discuss predictions for each of these factors in the following subsections. Average purchase price. Recent research by Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield (2010a, b) shows that shoppers have mental budgets, or spending expectations, for grocery trips and try to avoid exceeding these amounts. Even though there may be some room in the shopper’s mental budget for unplanned purchases, making an unplanned purchase can cause feelings of guilt if the purchase is perceived to be excessive (Mukopadhyay and Johar 2007). In addition, more expensive items are likely to be more accessible in memory and, therefore, included on the shopping list. This suggests that shoppers will be more hesitant to purchase expensive items on an unplanned as opposed to a planned basis. Frequency and recency. To plan purchases in advance, consumers must be able to cognitively recognize the need or want. Consumers tend to have difficulty retrieving all of their grocery needs from memory (Bettman 1979), so items that are more easily recalled are more likely to be planned. For example, Inman, Winer, and Ferraro (2009) argue that frequently purchased products are more likely to be planned because these items are more accessible from memory (Posavac, Sanbonmatsu, and Fazio 1997). However, this effect may be tempered by the amount of time that has elapsed since the last purchase. Items that have been pur- chased relatively recently may not need to be “restocked,” and such purchases may be opportunistic and unplanned. In contrast, items that have not been purchased for a relatively long time are more likely to be purchased on a planned ver- sus unplanned basis as a result of the consumer noting the household’s exhausted inventory of that item. Empirical Test Data The data we use to test our behavioral hypotheses are from a field study first discussed by Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield (2010b). Our analysis differs from theirs in that their analy- sis focuses on cross-sectional differences in the total amount spent as a function of how much of the budget is still avail- able, whereas our research focuses on the individual-level sequence of planned and unplanned purchases. A random sample of 400 customers from two grocery stores located in a southwestern U.S. city were intercepted as they entered the supermarket and asked to participate in a marketing research study. We define an unplanned purchase as one that was not planned before the consumer entered the store. We follow the procedures of prior researchers (Hui, Huang, et al. 2013; Inman, Winer, and Ferraro 2009; Kollat and Willet 1967; Park, Iyer, and Smith 1989), asking respon- dents what product categories they planned to purchase before beginning their shopping trip. Every tenth shopper entering the store (or one every five minutes) was approached and asked to participate in a market research study. Shoppers were offered a $10 incentive for a future shopping trip in return for their participation. They were asked what items they intended to buy, how much they expected to spend on the planned purchases, and how much they expected to spend overall (i.e., their overall trip bud- get). Furthermore, shoppers were asked how often they shop for groceries, how frequently they visit the focal store, and whether they were shopping for a particular occasion on the current trip. Planned versus unplanned purchases were determined by comparing responses in the preshop- ping survey with shoppers’ actual purchases. After completing the entrance survey, respondents were given a handheld scanner and asked to scan the bar code of each item as they placed it into their cart. This method records the specific order in which items were selected and allows for investigation of sequential effects. After complet- ing their shopping trip, respondents provided additional information in an exit interview, and the researchers made a copy of their receipts, which provided a record of the price and amount spent on each item. Respondents also provided their frequent shopper card number, providing access to their shopping histories. Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield (2010b) offer more details, including evidence that the research methodology did not alter the average amount shoppers spent. Specifically, they compare each shopper’s spending on the survey trip with spending on similar trips using the FSP data and report that the difference between the amount spent on the day of the survey and the preceding six-month mean is not statistically significant (F = 1.70). For the pur- poses of our study, a demand effect would manifest itself as a shopper deliberately changing the sequencing of planned versus unplanned items. Although participants were instructed to scan items as they selected them, they were given no indication that the sequence of planned versus unplanned items was relevant. Because the aggregate amount spent was not different between this trip and previ- ous trips, it seems unlikely that shopping behavior changed. Although it is theoretically possible that shoppers systemati- cally changed the sequence of planned and unplanned items while keeping their overall spending unchanged, this seems unlikely. However, we cannot definitively rule out demand The Role of Within-Trip Dynamics / 61 effects, and this is a potential limitation of the current methodology, which we discuss further in the conclusion. Complete data are available for 328 shoppers who made a total of 9,988 purchases. Approximately 80% of the shop- pers were female, the average household size was just under three people, and the average total trip budget was $66.45, with $46.08 devoted to planned items and $20.37 budgeted for unplanned items. Average total expenditures equaled $69.84, with $35.25 spent on planned items and $34.59 spent on unplanned items. Table 1 displays selected statis- tics on respondents’ purchase behavior. Of the 9,988 pur- chases, 1,807 items represented duplicate universal product codes (UPCs; e.g., two cans of tomatoes, several loaves of bread) for the same shopper. Because our analysis focuses on sequential effects, we removed these duplicate UPCs removed from the data set so as not to confound purchase quantity effects with the selection of planned versus unplanned items. Of the 1,807 duplicate items, 47.5% were unplanned, indicating that shoppers were slightly more likely to make multiple purchases of planned items. After removing duplicates, our final data set consists of 8,181 purchases. Model In our data, we observe the sequence of selections by each shopper, and our goal is to determine whether systematic factors are associated with whether a selection is planned or unplanned. In this sense, our analysis is similar to that per- formed by Inman, Winer, and Ferraro (2009), but our focus is on dynamic factors within the shopping trip. Our concep- tual discussion provides theoretical support for our thesis that the propensity to make an unplanned (vs. planned) pur- chase should change over the course of the shopping trip. Figure 1 illustrates the proportion of selections that are unplanned at different stages of the trip. In the first quarter of the shopping trip, 42.7% of the selections are unplanned, but among the fourth quarter of selections, 54.7% are unplanned. This model-free evidence suggests that selecting planned versus unplanned items is dynamic. Figure 1 also previews one of our key findings, showing that the incre- TABLE 1 Purchase Behavior Removed Original Duplicate Data UPCs Number of respondents 328 328 Number of purchases 9,988 8,181 Percentage unplanned 52.7% 53.9% Number of duplicate UPCs 1,807 — Percentage unplanned 47.5% — Average number of purchases 30.5 24.9 Distribution of Purchases Maximum 158 109 75th percentile 39 32 Median 24 20 25th percentile 16 14 Minimum 7 2 mental increase from within-trip dynamics grows over the course of the shopping trip. Our approach is to model planned versus unplanned purchases as a function of variables that describe the prod- uct, within-trip dynamics, and FSP variables. Our depen- dent variable is binary, indicating whether the nth selection for person i is planned (yin = 0) or unplanned (yin = 1). Our analysis is restricted to determining whether there are sys- tematic differences between the selection of planned and unplanned items in a shopping trip. We define and measure all variables without knowing whether the current selection is planned or unplanned, but they are conditioned on observing a selection. A different analysis designed to pre- dict whether an unplanned purchase is made at all (an unconditional analysis) would require a different modeling approach and significantly more information. We return to this topic when discussing further research. Our statistical model is given by where xin is a vector of independent variables for shopper i for the nth item selected, zin is a vector of variables indicat- ing a store’s specific shopping zones, and y*in is a latent variable representing the propensity to make an unplanned versus planned purchase. The vector bi, the intercept bi0, and the scalar gi are individual parameters, while the vector d and the scalar f are parameters common across respon- dents. Equation 1 is a probit model with a lagged dependent variable and serially correlated error terms. Consistent with Inman, Winer, and Ferraro (2009), our model conceptualizes the selection of a planned versus unplanned item as a function of the attributes of the product ( ) = β + ′β + γ + ′δ + ε ε = φε + ν ν σ = > = −(1) y x y z , , where ~ N 0, , y 1 if y 0, else y 0, in * io i in i i, n 1 in in in i, n – 1 in in v 2 in in * in 62 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 but not of competing products. An item is either planned or unplanned, but the selection of an unplanned item does not preclude the selection of some other planned (or unplanned) item on a subsequent selection. Whereas the choice of Fol- ger’s coffee typically precludes the choice of Maxwell House coffee, the selection of an unplanned can of coffee does not preclude the subsequent selection of a planned bag of flour. Thus, our model is not comparable to discrete brand choice models in which the explanatory variables include not only the selected brand’s variables but also the values of other brands in the consideration set. Rather, it is closer in spirit to purchase incidence models in which, con- ditional on a shopping trip, the purchase in a product cate- gory is a function of that product category’s characteristics in a given week but not the characteristics of other product categories (see, e.g., Gupta 1988). We discuss the shopping zone variables, error structure, and heterogeneity after reviewing the independent variables summarized in Table 2. Independent Variables Cumulative spending. Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield (2010b) report that consumers have a mental budget for what they expect to spend overall in a shopping trip as well as how much they expect to spend on unplanned items. We include the natural logarithm of cumulative spending on unplanned purchases to control for a self-imposed budget on unplanned purchases; we expect the effect of cumulative unplanned spending to be negative. We also consider the effect of cumulative spending on planned items, which can play two roles. First, as a con- sumer gets planned items and uses up the budget allocated to those purchases, it is more likely that any remaining selections will be unplanned. Second, as the shopping trip progresses, consumers are exposed to more cues and self- regulation resources are likely to become depleted, increas- ing the likelihood of making unplanned versus planned pur- chases. We therefore expect the coefficient of the natural logarithm of cumulative planned purchases to be positive, although we cannot definitively conclude whether it is due to the exhaustion of the planned budget, self-regulation resources, or cues in the environment. Product-related factors. In line with previous empirical research, we include several variables related to the product and/or product category. We expect shoppers to avoid mak- ing unplanned versus planned purchases of items that are priced above their historical average price. An item might be above its average price because of a price increase or because the item is frequently on sale but not on this par- ticular shopping trip. An item is designated as having a “higher price” if its current price is at least 10% above its historical average. We discuss “on sale” items when we review the results. Furthermore, Inman, Winer, and Ferraro (2009) show that product category hedonicity has a signifi- cant impact on unplanned purchase probability. Product categories were assigned a hedonic score on the basis of the hedonicity ratings reported by Wakefield and Inman (2003) and were then mean centered; more utilitarian goods have a negative score, while more “fun” items have a positive FIGURE 1 Proportion of Selections That Are Unplanned at Different Stages of the Shopping Trip with Modeled Sources of Increase 0%– 25% 25.1%– 50% 50.1%– 75% 75.1%– 100% 60.0% 55.0% 50.0% 45.0% 40.0% 35.0% Stage of the Shopping Trip 42.7% 48.4% 48.6% 54.7% 4.1% 3.2% 7.9% 4.1% 2.7%1.6% 1st quartile baseline Other effects Within-trip dynamics score. We expect the coefficient of the hedonicity variable to be positive (i.e., hedonic items are more likely to be unplanned rather than planned). Lagged purchase. The coefficient on the lagged depen- dent variable yn – 1 tests the effect of an unplanned purchase on a subsequent unplanned purchase. In the dynamic dis- crete choice literature (Heckman 1981b), this would be labeled “state dependence” or “purchase event feedback” (Haaijer and Wedel 2001). This is consistent with our con- ceptualization, wherein the specific act of making an unplanned purchase changes the intentions of the shopper. For a shopper to stick to an overall budget and shopping goals, self-regulation theory implies that a shopper will return to planned items after making an unplanned selec- tion. However, if an unplanned purchase cues another for- gotten want or need, a subsequent selection is more likely to be unplanned than planned. As mentioned previously, we expect that self-regulation theory will describe shoppers with smaller trip budgets and, therefore, the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable will be negative. For larger- trip-budget shoppers, we expect a positive coefficient on the lagged dependent variable consistent with cuing theory. Importantly, we test our thesis that the reaction to choosing an unplanned item changes over the course of the The Role of Within-Trip Dynamics / 63 shopping trip. A shopper’s desire or ability to stick to his or her original shopping goals may be depleted as the shop- ping trip progresses, so the strategy of deliberately selecting a planned item after making an unplanned selection may be abandoned at some point. Cuing theory also suggests that the shopper’s active cognitive processing will lead to more recognized wants or needs as the shopping trip progresses. We test this using an interaction between the lagged depen- dent variable and the natural log of the cumulative number of selections made up to the current selection. For this test, the cumulative number of selections represents the length of the shopping trip; using the log of the cumulative number of selections limits the correlation between this variable and the log of cumulative spending on planned items.1 An alter- native would be to use the amount of time between entering the store and the current selection, which would require a “time stamp” from the handheld scanner. Unfortunately, this measure is not available in our data. TABLE 2 Independent Variables Variable Predicted Sign Operationalization Ln(Planned + The natural log of total amount spent on planned items up to the previous selection. Cumulative $n – 1) We calculated this by matching prices to the sequence of items selected from the handheld scanner. Shoppers indicated what items they planned to buy in the preshopping survey, which allowed for identification of planned and unplanned items. Ln(Unplanned – The natural log of total amount spent on unplanned items up to the previous selection Cumulative $n – 1) Hedonic + The mean-centered hedonicity of the product category for the selected item based on Wakefield and Inman (2003) survey data. Negative and smaller values indicate more “utilitarian” products, while higher values indicate more “indulgent” products. Higher Price – Equal to 1 if the current price is 10% higher than the average price of that UPC in the past six months; otherwise equal to 0 yn – 1 +/– Lagged dependent variable equal to 1 if the previous selection was unplanned; otherwise equal to 0 Ln(nth purchase) ¥ yn – 1 + Interaction term between the natural log of the number of items selected so far and whether the previous selection was unplanned. n indicates the first, second, third, … selection by a shopper. Over trip budget + Equal to 1 when the cumulative purchases exceed the stated budget from the preshopping survey; otherwise equal to 0 Hedonicn – 1 – The mean-centered hedonicity of the previously selected item Hedonicn – 1 ¥ yn – 1 N.A. Interaction term between the mean-centered hedonicity of the previously selected item and the lagged dependent variable Ln(PC Mean Price) – Natural log of the mean price of items purchased in the product category by the shopper in the past six months. If there are no purchases, Ln(PC Mean Price) set = 0. Ln(PC Frequency) – Natural log of how many times the shopper purchased in the product category in the past six months. If frequency = 0, Ln(PC Frequency) set = 0. Ln(PC Recency Ratio) + Natural log of how many days it has been since the shopper’s last purchase in the product category, divided by the product category’s average interpurchase time. If no purchase in the last six months, recency is set = 180. Notes: N.A. = not applicable. 1The correlation between Ln(Planned Cumulative $n – 1) and Ln(nth purchase) ¥ yn – 1 is .23. We also included the main effect for Ln(nth purchase) in the model, but it was not statistically sig- nificant; therefore, we removed it. Model coefficients and the sub- stantive results do not change when Ln(nth purchase) is included in the model. Formally, our measure of resource depletion and cogni- tive processing accords more effect to the actual delibera- tion and choosing of products rather than merely being in the store. However, we expect the two measures (cumula- tive time and cumulative selections) to be highly correlated.2 Both cuing theory and self-regulation theory imply that the coefficient on this interaction term will be positive. Similarly, we expect that after a shopper exceeds the stated budget for the shopping trip, the cumulative effect of being exposed to many cues and/or resource deple- tion will lead to increased purchases of unplanned as opposed to planned items. We test this expectation by including a dummy variable equal to 1 for selections made after the trip budget is exceeded (and equal to 0 before that point); we expect the coefficient of the dummy variable to be positive. The licensing effect suggests that the purchase of a low- hedonic item will give the shopper “permission” to indulge and select a more “fun” item with a higher hedonicity rat- ing. Because unplanned items are more likely to have higher hedonicity ratings (Inman, Winer, and Ferraro 2009), this suggests that purchasing an item with a low hedonicity rating will increase the probability that the subsequent item will be unplanned. To test this prediction, we lag the afore- mentioned hedonicity variable by one selection. If the pur- chase of a low-hedonic product (hedonicity value less than 0) increases the probability that the subsequent selection is unplanned, its coefficient should be negative. Furthermore, to test whether this effect is influenced by whether the pre- vious item was planned or unplanned, we include the inter- action between lagged hedonicity and yn – 1. We constructed individualized shopping variables by analyzing the previous six months’ FSP shopping history for each respondent. For each product category for each individual, we computed the average price paid in the cate- gory, the number of times a purchase was made, and the recency (in number of days) of the last purchase. We trans- formed the recency variable to recognize that some pur- chase categories are consumed more quickly than others (e.g., the interpurchase time for milk is typically shorter than for maple syrup). For each product category in our data, we calculated the average interpurchase time. We computed the ratio of the shopper’s recency to the average interpurchase time for the given product category. The natu- ral logs of these variables were then merged into the current shopping trip data. We expect the coefficient on price to be negative, indicating that higher-priced items are more likely to be planned. Similarly, we expect the coefficient on fre- quency to be negative, indicating that more frequently pur- chased items are more likely to be planned. The coefficient 64 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 on recency should be negative, indicating that items pur- chased a relatively longer time ago are more likely to be planned as a result of exhausting a household’s existing stock. Table 2 summarizes the variables and the expected coefficients. Shopping Zone Variables, Error Structure, and Heterogeneity The self-regulation and cuing models imply that the selec- tion of a planned or unplanned item is not independent of a shopper’s prior selections. In addition to the independent variables already discussed, other effects, such as environ- mental factors (e.g., store layout), might induce sequential effects in planned/unplanned purchase behavior. For exam- ple, being in the cookies aisle might result in more unplanned purchases than being in the produce section. Similarly, the purchase of hamburger meat may cue the unplanned need for ketchup and prompt the shopper to go to the condiments aisle and make a selection. Furthermore, store managers may deliberately lay out the store to encour- age unplanned purchases; excluding variables that capture this effect may lead to an endogeneity problem. We control for store layout by including shopping zone dummy variables that capture the area of the supermarket in which the current selection is made (for a similar approach, see Hui, Bradlow, and Fader 2009) as well as the previous selection. Our data are from two stores with different lay- outs. In the first store, we identified and coded 34 distinct shopping zones, whereas the second was coded into 24 shopping zones. The shopping zones typically coincide with the aisles in the supermarket, meat or dairy sections, checkout, and special displays. Even after including the independent variables and shopping zone variables, there may be other unaccounted- for environmental factors that result in correlations between selections. Our model captures these factors through seri- ally correlated error terms, represented as a first-order autoregressive process and the parameter f. When |f| < 1, the sequence of selections is stationary in the sense that the influence of previous selections dies off in an exponential manner (see, e.g., Franses 1998; Greene 2000). Note, how- ever, that in our situation, the sequence is not indexed by time but by the order of purchase (n). If 0 < f < 1, this results in clusters of planned or unplanned purchases that are not fully explained by the variables in the model, but purchasing behavior ultimately reverts back to this explana- tory model. In the context of a utility-maximizing discrete choice model, Seetharaman (2004) offers a useful typology of dynamic effects. We do not formulate the model in terms of the “utility” of a planned versus an unplanned purchase, but there are some direct parallels in terms of the behavioral interpretation. As we have noted, the lagged dependent variable captures “state dependency” in the form of the shopper altering his or her behavior or being cued to another forgotten want or need as the result of making an unplanned purchase. Lagged hedonicity and shopping zone variables capture characteristics of the previous purchase that may affect the shopper’s propensity to make a planned 2When analyzing differences in unplanned purchases across shopping trips or shoppers, as in Bell, Corsten, and Knox (2011) or Inman, Winer, and Ferraro (2009), “time spent shopping” may be endogenous because purchasing more unplanned items entails spending more time in the supermarket. However, this is not a concern in the current study because our unit of analysis is the item-by-item selection process rather than the aggregate number of purchases. versus unplanned purchase, analogous to Seetharaman’s (2004) carryover effects of marketing variables. The auto- correlated error (ACE) is a form of “habit persistence” that captures effects on the shopper that are not observed by the researcher. In our model, we posit that the habit persistence results from environmental or other factors that influence the probability of making a planned or unplanned purchase, which decay over time.3 Stewart (2006) offers a straightforward introduction to the random-effects probit model with ACEs and a lagged dependent variable. Keane (1997) provides a more elabo- rate example in the context of brand choice. As noted previ- ously, the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable will be used to test whether and how shoppers alter their shop- ping behavior as the result of making an unplanned selec- tion. Whether the average gi is greater or less than 0 will provide evidence regarding the role of state dependence in unplanned purchase behavior. However, the estimated value of g will be biased if other factors result in serial correlation but are not properly modeled. For example, if there is posi- tive autocorrelation, but it is not modeled, the value of g will have an upward bias. To compare models with and without ACEs, we para- meterize the error variance term in Equation 1 as s2v = (1 – f2). Note that, in an ACE regression, the full error covari- ance matrix is given as the following (Judge et al. 1988, p. 387): which is consistent with our latent variable structure in Equation 1. For a probit model, the usual way to identify the model is to set s2v = 1; with f = 0, the error covariance matrix is simply the identity matrix. However, with s2v = 1 and |f| > 0, the diagonal elements in Equation 2 are greater than 1, resulting in an increase in the error variance. Increasing the error variance reduces model fit statistics. We set s2v = (1 – f2) so that the diagonal elements in Equation 2 are always equal to 1 regardless of the value of f, amelio- rating the increase in variance. The net result is that model fit statistics are more comparable for probit models with and without ACEs. We adopt a Bayesian approach for inference and estima- tion, which has a bearing on how we model heterogeneity and test for differences between shoppers’ goals or plans for the trip. In panel data, state dependency may arise as a result of not properly accounting for heterogeneity (Heck- man 1981b). Equation 1 includes fixed parameters across the sample as well as individual-level heterogeneity. Heterogeneity is modeled as [bi0,{bi}, gi] ~ Np(b, S), which is a multivariate normal distribution for the stacked vector σ − φ φ φ φ φ φ φ                 (2) 1 1 1 1 ,V 2 2 N – 1 N – 2 N – 1 N – 2        The Role of Within-Trip Dynamics / 65 [bi0, {bi}, gi]. The error correlation coefficient f is common across respondents because, with the relatively short panel structure, we could not obtain stable parameter estimates for the distribution of heterogeneity in simulated data with individual-level fi. Similarly, because each respondent often made only one selection or no selections in a particu- lar shopping zone, we pooled the effects of the shopping zone variables across respondents. The prior on f is uni- form U(–1, 1); we use conjugate but diffuse priors for d, S, and b (full details appear in the Web Appendix). Allowing for individual-level parameters (particularly on the intercept term) controls for differences in the purpose of the trip (Bell, Corsten, and Knox 2011; Knox, Bell, and Corsten 2011); individual differences such as using a list, gender, and pay- ment type (Inman, Winer, and Ferraro 2009); impulsivity (Stilley, Inman, and Wakefield 2010a); and other person/ trip factors that have been shown to influence the amount of unplanned purchasing at the trip level. As noted previously, shoppers’ plans or goals for the trip may determine whether the self-regulation or cuing model best describes their behavior. Because we do not have explicit information regarding the purpose of the trip analogous to the measures used by Bell, Corsten, and Knox (2011), we use the total amount that the shopper planned to spend before entering the supermarket as a proxy for the shopper’s plans. We take smaller trip budgets to indicate more targeted and goal-oriented shopping trips, whereas larger trip budgets indicate less well-defined goals such as “major trip, weekly or less often,” as used by Bell, Corsten, and Knox. The amount each shopper planned to spend on the shopping trip ranged from a minimum of $7 to a maxi- mum of $400, with a median of $50 and an average of $66.45. As we described previously, we predict that the self-regulation model will characterize smaller-trip-budget shoppers, whereas the cuing model will characterize shop- pers with larger trip budgets. Models with individual-level heterogeneity must con- sider whether the random effects are correlated with the independent variables included in the model (Wooldridge 2010). In models estimated with maximum likelihood, in which the random effects are integrated out of the likeli- hood, failure to account for the correlation can result in endogeneity. In our Bayesian model, the individual-level parameters are not integrated out of the likelihood function, so there is not the same endogeneity problem. However, it still might be the case that the individual-level effects are a function of variables either included or not included in the model. To address this possibility, we allow for het- eroskedasticity in the model intercept terms between shop- pers. Our approach follows that of Bresson, Hsia, and Pirotte (2011), who introduced the model in the context of a linear regression model with panel data and individual-level heterogeneity. As they note, heteroskedasticity could arise as a result of differences between shoppers (e.g., income) or because the individual-level parameters are correlated with the independent variables. In the full model, the distribution of heterogeneity is represented as 3We do not include a term for lagged utility, as Seetharaman (2004) does for his utility-maximizing model. We include geomet- ric decay only for the ACE, or “habit persistence.” where Equation 3a represents a regression equation with an individual-level variance term to capture the heteroskedas - ticity. Equation 3b is a multivariate normal regression, and the vector wi includes an intercept term and the mean-centered budget for shopper i. Our model differs from that of Bres- son, Hsia, and Pirotte (2011) in that we include explanatory variables in the distribution of heterogeneity and our base model is a correlated probit as opposed to a linear regres- sion. The Web Appendix reports full details of the model. There are several possible sources of endogeneity in our model. Endogeneity occurs when the independent variables are correlated with the error term. First, as Heckman (1981a, p. 102) notes, if there is serial correlation in the error terms, the lagged dependent variable will be corre- lated with the error term. We address this in our model by explicitly modeling the ACE term with fei, n – 1, where nin is assumed to be the i.i.d. error term. Second, if relevant variables are omitted from the model and those variables are correlated with the included independent variables, this can lead to an endogeneity problem. We believe the most likely sources of omitted variables are environmental occur- rences that vary in different parts of the store (e.g., product assortment, end-of-aisle displays, shelf notices). As noted previously, we control for these factors by including shop- ping zone dummy variables for the current and lagged selection. If these variables are correlated with the other independent variables (i.e., the z variables are correlated with the x variables), we would expect to observe a signifi- cant change in the parameter estimates between models with and without the shopping zone variables. As we have discussed, another possible source of endogeneity occurs if the random intercept terms are correlated with the indepen- dent variables (i.e., between bi0 and the x variables). Given our hierarchical Bayes model, we do not believe this is a concern, but there could still be unaccounted-for variables determining the difference between the random effects. We model this through the heteroskedasticity in the upper level of the hierarchical Bayes structure in Equation 3a. Despite controlling for these possible sources of endogeneity, it still may be the case that the x variables are correlated with the n variables. This is ultimately an empirical issue, and we know of no formal statistical test that would apply in our model structure. However, our model does allow for an empirical estimate of the realized values of n—call them n̂—and we test to determine whether the independent variables are correlated with the realized error terms. Data augmentation facilitates estimating the model parameters using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods with- out relying on high dimensional integration. We ran Markov chain Monte Carlo chains for 10,000 iterations and used a sample of every 10th from the last 5,000 for model infer- ences. We assessed convergence by inspecting the time series plots of model parameters and reestimating the mod- els with different random seeds. Results with simulated data ( ) { } ( ) β ′θ σ β γ  θ ∆− (3a) ~ N w , , and (3b) , ~ N w , , i0 0 i i 2 i i p 1 i 66 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 also confirmed that 10,000 iterations were adequate. All models converged quickly. For model comparison, we calculate the log-marginal density (LMD) using the importance sampler of Gelfand and Dey (1994) as used in hierarchical models by Lenk and DeSarbo (2000) and Gilbride and Lenk (2010). This estima- tor performed consistently well in the results reported by Gamerman and Lopes (2006). To calculate the LMD, we need to estimate the probability of the observed data. For calculating probabilities, we use the GHK simulator as sug- gested in Geweke, Keane, and Runkle (1997) and detailed in Train (2003); Stewart (2006) summarizes its implementation in dynamic probit models with ACEs. We use the GHK to simulate probabilities even in models without correlated error terms to control for noise resulting from the simulation. Results We estimated four models. The purpose of the first three is to determine the effect of various independent variables as well as whether we need to include ACEs. Model 1 includes the cumulative spending variables and the product category hedonicity as well as whether the item is priced higher than in previous weeks. Model 2 subsumes Model 1 and adds shopping trip dynamics, and Model 3 subsumes Model 2 and adds the shopping zone variables. The final model uses the best of the preceding models, tests the effect of planned budget on the model dynamics, and incorporates het- eroskedasticity into the distribution of heterogeneity. We estimated Models 1–3 with and without ACEs. Table 3 pre- sents parameter estimates and fit statistics. We estimated the LMD for Models 1–3, and it favors the model with the highest value; for the full model, we used posterior predic- tive model checking to assess the adequacy of the model. Models 1–3. First, we note that in all three instances, the models with the ACE structure fit better than those without. In Models 2 and 3, the coefficient for the lagged dependent variable or state dependence went from negative and statis- tically significant (–.272 and –.275, respectively) to not sig- nificant when the ACEs were eliminated from the model, illustrating the potential biasing effect of excluding corre- lated error terms in models of sequential choice. The auto- correlation coefficient is positive in all three models (.346, .228, and .126) but is smallest in Model 3, in which the cur- rent and lagged shopping zone variables capture some of the unexplained carryover between selections. The LMD of –4,845.4 favors Model 2 with the ACEs but without the shopping zone variables; this specification is used in the full model. With the possible exception of the autocorrelation coefficient, we note the similarity in the parameter estimates between the models with and without the shopping zone variables; this suggests that including the shopping zone variables does not affect the correlational structure between the Xn variables and the error term. How- ever, if the independent variables are correlated with the error term, this could indicate that sources of endogeneity still remain in the model. For each observation, we calcu- lated the empirical estimate of the error term n̂in from Equa- tion 1 and calculated the correlation coefficient between it and each of the independent variables. Across the posterior distribution of the parameters, none of the correlation coef- ficients was significantly different from 0 at a 95% level,4 which provides additional evidence that endogeneity is not a major concern in the model. Full model. The right-hand side of Table 3 contains the parameter estimates from the full model, which is Model 2 with planned budget as an explanatory variable for the other parameters and heteroskedasticity on the individual inter- cepts. We first discuss model fit and evidence of het- eroskedasticity and then turn to the substantive interpreta- tion. In the full model, the first observation for each shopper had to be dropped (unlike Models 1–3); therefore, we did not calculate the LMD, because comparison with the earlier models would not be meaningful. Rather, we use the posterior distribution of model parameters, generate planned and unplanned purchases for each shopper, and then com- pare the distribution of unplanned purchases with the actual data. This is a form of posterior model checking in which a salient aspect of the original data is compared with predic- tions from the model; systematic departures suggest that the model is not adequate (for an extended discussion and refer- ences, see Gilbride and Lenk 2010). In our case, the number of unplanned purchases made by each shopper is not directly modeled but is an ancillary statistic. Figure 2 and Table 4 show that the mean and median of the predicted unplanned purchases (13.8 and 9.0) match very closely with the actual distribution (13.4 and 9.0). Fig- ure 2 shows that there is some tendency to overstate the fre- The Role of Within-Trip Dynamics / 67 TABLE 3 Model Comparison: Posterior Means Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Full Model ACE Non-ACE ACE Non-ACE ACE Non-ACE Intercept Budget b0 Intercept –.319** –.288** .248** .188** .037 –.004 .306** .000 b1 Ln(Planned Cumulative $n – 1) .274** .146** .250** .236** .277** .274** .361** .000 b2 Ln(Unplanned Cumulative $n – 1) –.131** .000 –.217** –.239** –.231** –.246** –.376** .001 b3 Hedonic .090** .086** .118** .119** .155** .107** .107** .001 b4 Higher price –.114** –.140** –.131** –.140** –.124* –.124* –.153** .000 g yn – 1 (state dependency) –.272** –.108 –.275** –.134 –.221* .006** b6 Ln(nth purchase) ¥ yn – 1 .154** .213** .200** .216** .161** –.002** b7 Over trip budget .224** .218** .150* .164* .256** –.003 b8 Hedonicn – 1 –.164** –.179** –.185** –.196** –.179** .001 b9 Hedonicn – 1 × yn – 1 .189** .185** .206** .214** .203** .000 b10 Ln(PC Mean Price) –.132** –.135** –.184** –.184** –.149** .001 b11 Ln(PC Frequency) –.204** –.206** –.254** –.257** –.223** .000 b12 Ln(PC Recency Ratio) –.046* –.052* –.064** –.065** –.048* .000 f autocorrelation coefficient .346** .— .228** .— .126** .— .187** Significant Shopping Zone Variables Current zone 18/58 20/58 Distribution of s2i Lagged zone 5/57 3/57 25th = .213, 50th = LMD –5,167.6 –5,252.5 –4,845.4 –4,904.1 –5,050.5 –5,107.3 .360, 75th = 1.058 *Indicates that 90% of the posterior mass is away from 0—that is, the estimate is significant at the 90% level. **Indicates that 95% of the posterior mass is away from 0—that is, the estimate is significant at the 95% level. Notes: Log-marginal density favors the model with the highest number. PC = product category. TABLE 4 Posterior Predictive Model Check: Summary Statistics for Unplanned Purchases Number of Unplanned Purchases Across Shoppers Percentile Actual Predicted 25th 5.0 4.5 50th 9.0 9.0 75th 17.0 18.0 Average 13.4 13.8 FIGURE 2 Posterior Predictive Model Check: Distribution of Unplanned Purchases <3 3– 5.99 6– 8.99 9– 14.99 15– 30.99 >31 100 80 60 40 20 0 Number of Unplanned Purchases Nu m be r o f S ho pp er s Actual Predicted 4Consistent with the tables, in the text we refer to a parameter as being “significant” when 95% of its posterior mass is away from 0. quency of unplanned purchases for the very highest and lowest part of the distribution. Across the 328 shoppers, the predicted number of unplanned purchases was higher than the actual in 50.3% of the cases and lower in 49.7%, and the correlation between the predicted number of unplanned pur- chases per shopper and the actual number was .995. We believe that this provides evidence that the full model is adequate. With regard to heteroskedasticity, as the bottom right-hand side of Table 3 shows, the 25th percentile of s2i is .213, whereas the 75th percentile is 1.058, suggesting that there are differences in the error variance of the model intercept across shoppers. In the “Full Model” columns in Table 3, the parameter estimates for the “Intercept” column can be interpreted as the effect of the corresponding independent variable when the overall budget for a shopper is equal to the sample mean. For example, the coefficient for Ln(Unplanned Cumulative $n – 1) would be calculated as b2 = –.376 + .001 ¥ Budgeti, where Budgeti is the mean-centered budget for shopper i. However, for all variables except the lagged dependent variable (yn – 1) and the interaction between the lagged dependent variable and cumulative purchases (Ln(nth purchase) ¥ yn – 1), budget adds no explanatory power, and attention can be focused on the column labeled “Intercept.” So, in the example for Ln(Unplanned Cumula- tive $n – 1), b2 = –.376 because the coefficient for the “Bud- get” column is not statistically different from 0. The parameters for unplanned cumulative spending (negative), category hedonicity (positive), and higher- priced items (negative) are consistent with previous research. One might expect that items on sale or on promo- tion would increase shoppers’ probability of making an unplanned versus planned purchase. We tested several operationalizations of these variables but did not find a sta- tistically significant relationship. Although Inman, Winer, and Ferraro (2009) did not have a “promotion” variable, they found a significant impact for displays, which presum- ably coincided with products that were on promotion; how- ever, not all items on promotion are likely to have a display. Our data did not have information on displays beyond that captured in the shopping zone variables.5 It may be the case that many shoppers used weekly inserts or circulars to con- struct their shopping lists before entering the store, muting the overall impact of promotions on prompting unplanned versus planned purchases. Gupta (1988) finds that regular prices and price cuts have no impact in his purchasing tim- ing model. He concludes that shoppers who did not plan on making a purchase in a category may not pay attention to prices. Our results show that the propensity to make unplanned as opposed to planned purchases is dynamic and differs between shoppers with varied shopping plans. The coeffi- cient on planned cumulative spending (b1 = .361) is posi- tive and significant, indicating that as the shopping trip pro- gresses, unplanned items become more likely to be selected than planned items. However, because the coefficient for 68 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 unplanned cumulative spending is negative (b2 = –.376), the overall impact is not clear. There is support for the cumulative effect of shopping cues and/or resource deple- tion toward the end of the shopping trip. When shoppers exceed their stated trip budget (b7 = .256), they are more likely to make unplanned rather than planned purchases. As we note subsequently, the impact of the nth selection when the previous item was unplanned requires special attention to interpret its impact. Although the model-free evidence in Figure 1 indicates that unplanned versus planned selections increase over the course of the shopping trip, this may be due to hedonicity or other factors unrelated to how long the shopper has been making selections in the supermarket. To test whether unplanned versus planned purchases become more likely as the shopping trip progresses, we used only the dynamic variables in our model to predict the proba- bility of making an unplanned versus planned selection. Specifically, we used the variables ln(Planned Cumulative $n – 1), ln(Unplanned Cumulative $n – 1), yn – 1, ln(nth purchase) ¥ yn – 1, and Over trip budget together with the individual-level betas estimated from the full model. In this simulation, the values of all other variables were set to 0. Integrating over the posterior distribution of model parame- ters, we find the probability of making an unplanned versus planned purchase is 9.6% higher during the last quarter of selections than during the first quarter of selections, and the probability increases in each quartile. This result controls for the hedonicity of items, FSP variables, and whether the item is at a historically higher price. In other words, the 9.6% increase is attributable to the within-trip dynamics as opposed to the characteristics of the product. Figure 1 illustrates this result: the observed increase in unplanned versus planned purchases over the course of the shopping trip is allocated to within-trip and “other” sources using the model-based results. Focusing on the fourth quartile, unplanned versus planned purchases increases to 54.7% compared with 42.7% in the first quartile. Of the 12-percentage-point increase, 7.9 percentage points are attributed to other fac- tors, such as the hedonicity of the product (e.g., candy in the checkout aisles). However, 4.1 percentage points of the increase are due to within-trip dynamics; that is, each pur- chase in the last part of the shopping trip is 4.1 percentage points more likely to be unplanned due to within-trip dynamics. Although within-trip dynamics are not the only or largest source of the increase in unplanned versus planned purchases, they are substantively important, and this is the first research to quantify their magnitude. The interpretation with regard to state dependency is more nuanced. Because Budget is statistically significant in the distribution of heterogeneity, the state-dependency variable must be calculated as g = –.221 + .006 ¥ Budgeti and the interaction term as b6 = .161 – .002 ¥ Budgeti. To investigate the implications of the relationship between trip budget and state dependence, we examined the posterior distribution of the parameters. Recall that Budgeti is mean- centered, so this variable will be negative for shoppers who plan to spend less than the sample average ($66.45). For shoppers with a planned overall budget of less than $64 (or 61% of the sample), the state-dependent variable g is statisti- 5We also estimated the full model with the shopping zone variables, and the substantive results are the same. cally significant and negative, while the interaction term b6 is positive and statistically significant.6 This means that for shoppers with a below-average trip budget (whom we call “smaller-trip-budget” shoppers), an unplanned purchase ini- tially decreases the probability that the next selection will be unplanned and increases the probability that it will be planned. That is, self-regulation theory applies. However, as the shopping trip progresses (as measured by the cumula- tive number of selections n), this effect eventually reverses. We report details of these calculations in Table 5. For shoppers planning on spending between $64 and $109 (27% of the sample), g is not statistically significant, but b6 is positive and statistically significant. This means that for these medium-trip-budget shoppers, an unplanned purchase always increases the probability that the next item will be unplanned versus planned; that is, cuing theory applies. Moreover, this effect grows larger as the shopping trip progresses. For large-trip-budget shoppers with a trip The Role of Within-Trip Dynamics / 69 budget greater than $109 (12% of the sample), neither g nor b6 is statistically significant, indicating that an unplanned purchase has no impact on whether the next selection is either planned or unplanned at any point in the shopping trip. We summarize these conclusions in Table 5. Self-regulation theory suggests that shoppers will attempt to stick to their planned versus unplanned pur- chases by adopting altering responses but that depletion of their self-regulation resources may result in the abandon- ment of those plans. This model best describes the shoppers who planned to spend a smaller-than-average amount and presumably had more targeted shopping goals. For shop- pers planning to spend between $64 and $109, unplanned purchases always increased the probability of another unplanned purchase, and this effect increased over the shopping trip. These results are consistent with cuing theory. For large-trip-budget shoppers, the selection of planned or unplanned purchases had no impact on subse- quent selections, although the dynamics of cumulative planned and unplanned spending as well as being over bud- get had identical impacts. It may be that these large-trip- budget shoppers are not mindful of when they make a planned versus unplanned purchase and therefore do not change their behavior. These results have implications for 6Because our probit model is inherently nonlinear, caution must be used in interpreting interaction terms such as b6 and b9. Fol- lowing the results of Ai and Norton (2003) and Greene (2010, p. 292), and using the posterior means, the interaction between Ln(nth purchase) and yn – 1 is positive as long as b6 is positive. The interaction between Hedonicn – 1 and yn – 1 is also positive given the values of b8 and b9. TABLE 5 Overall Trip Budget and Dynamics of Unplanned Purchases A: State Dependence Calculations: Full Model gyn – 1 + b6 ln(nth purchase)] ¥ yn – 1 = g = –.221 + .006Budgeti [g + b6 ln(nth purchase)] ¥ yn – 1 b6 = .161 – .002Budgeti Budgeti = mean-centered overall budget Mean overall budget = $66.45 B: Representative Examples Net State Overall Budget nth Purchase g b6ln(nth Purchase) Dependency $50 2 –.32 .13 –.19 5 –.32 .31 –.01 10 –.32 .45 .13 $75 2 n.s. .10 .10 5 n.s. .23 .23 10 n.s .33 .33 $110 — n.s. n.s. n.s. C: Summary of Effects Proportion Overall Budget of Sample Dynamics of an Unplanned Purchase <$64 61% Early in the trip, an unplanned purchase decreases the probability that the next selection will be unplanned versus planned. This effect reverses as the shopping trip progresses. $64–$109 27% An unplanned purchase always increases the probability that the next selection will be unplanned versus planned. This effect grows larger as the shopping trip progresses. >$109 12% An unplanned purchase has no effect on whether the next selection will be planned or unplanned at any point in the shopping trip. Notes: n.s. = not significant at the 95% level. both theory development and management practice, which we discuss in the next section. The licensing effect posits that engaging in a necessary but difficult task gives the actor “permission” to engage in a more hedonic activity that may deviate from his or her ulti- mate goal. In the context of shopping, we interpret this to mean that buying a utilitarian item that is low in hedonicity will give the shopper permission to make an unplanned rather than a planned purchase on the next selection. We find that this effect holds for planned, but not for unplanned, purchases. When the previous selection was planned (yn – 1 = 0) and a utilitarian product, coefficients b8 and b9 show that this increases the probability that the next item will be unplanned [–.179 ¥ (–lagged hedonicity) + .203 ¥ (–lagged hedonicity) ¥ (0) > 0]. However, when the previous selec- tion was unplanned (yn – 1 = 1), there is no licensing effect (i.e., –.179 + .203 is not statistically different from 0). The results with the FSP variables are consistent with our prediction and suggest that historical information about shoppers’ purchases can be used to help identify planned versus unplanned purchases on the current trip. Based on prices paid by the individual shopper, product categories with a higher mean price are more likely to be planned than unplanned. These results are consistent with a resource- planning view, in which shoppers invest more time and cognitive resources in planning big-ticket items. We also find that more frequently purchased items are more likely to be planned than infrequently purchased items. Finally, when the time since last purchase is relatively long, ln(Recency_Ratio) > 0, the item is more likely to be pur- chased on a planned as opposed to unplanned basis. Discussion Our results have implications for marketing theory, con- sumers, and shopper marketing practice. Specifically, our findings suggest that the role of unplanned purchases on subsequent purchases is dynamic and nuanced and therefore requires an appropriate statistical model to draw correct inferences. Although prior research has demonstrated that more time spent shopping is related to the aggregate amount of unplanned purchases (e.g., Park, Iyer, and Smith 1989), our analysis is the first to show that the propensity to make unplanned versus planned purchases increases over the course of the shopping trip. As shoppers spend more of their budget on planned items, the probability of making unplanned versus planned purchases increases, but this is moderated by the amount budgeted for unplanned pur- chases. For smaller-trip-budget and medium-trip-budget shoppers, the selection of an unplanned item later in the shopping trip increases the probability that the next item will be unplanned rather than planned. After a shopper exceeds the planned budget for the shopping trip, unplanned purchases become more likely. Our findings also shed light on when a self-regulation model of shopping behavior versus a cuing model is more likely to apply. We find that only shoppers with below- average trip budgets engage in the altering response of avoiding an unplanned purchase after making an initial 70 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 unplanned purchase. This altering response is the key theo- retical difference between the self-regulation model and the cuing model. In contrast, shoppers with the largest spending plans do not seem to pay attention to planned versus unplanned purchases on an item-by-item basis—or if they do, it does not alter their immediate shopping behavior. Knowing when a shopper is amenable to suggestions for other unplanned items has direct managerial implications. The use of a list may affect a shopper’s self-regulation actions, resource depletion over the course of the shopping trip, or reliance on store-based shopping cues. Shoppers who use a list have larger planned budgets ($75.20) than those who do not ($62.72), indicating that large-trip-budget shoppers may be using a list as a coping mechanism. We tested this by including a “list” variable as an explanatory variable in the distribution of heterogeneity in the full model. However, it did not have a statistically significant impact on shopping dynamics. The finding that, for a shopping trip, shoppers can articulate what items they plan to buy, make a budget, and stay reasonably close to that budget suggests that shopping is a goal-directed activity. This research shows that select- ing planned versus unplanned items does not occur at ran- dom during a shopping trip even after controlling for cate- gory-specific and environmental factors. However, neither self-regulation theory nor cuing theory is adequate to explain the behavior of all shoppers because individual-spe- cific plans for the trip have a bearing on the most applicable model. We also find support for the licensing effect for all shoppers. We find that category hedonicity has an immedi- ate impact on the probability that a purchase will be unplanned versus planned, but our results also document a dynamic impact. The immediate impact is consistent with the findings reported by Shiv and Fedorikhin (1999). The dynamic impact supports the licensing effect, wherein a utilitarian selection gives the shopper permission to make an unplanned purchase in the next selection (Khan and Dhar 2006) but, according to our results, does so only when the previous selection was planned. The antecedent condi- tion of “sticking to the plan” seems to be important for the licensing effect in this context. Whereas Hui, Bradlow, and Fader (2009) find some support for the licensing effect with regard to browsing behavior, our results show a relationship between making a planned, less hedonic selection and then making an unplanned purchase. This discrepancy in find- ings may be attributed to our scaled measurement of item hedonicity and our focus on the item-by-item selection process, whereas Hui, Bradlow, and Fader employed a more coarse, dichotomous measure regarding whether the entire basket was primarily hedonic versus utilitarian. Managerial and Consumer Welfare Implications The results of our research have several implications for managers and consumers. First, the results suggest that at some point in a shopping trip, an unplanned selection increases the probability that the next selection will be unplanned versus planned, and this effect grows larger as the shopping trip continues. Our analysis is restricted to estimating systematic differences between planned and unplanned purchases. However, if we assume that some of the unplanned purchases are net additions to the shopping cart, the economic benefit to the retailer of an unplanned purchase is not limited to the current selection but has a carry- over effect. In our data, consumers planned on spending $20.37 on unplanned items but actually spent $34.59 on average. This benefit is tempered by the finding that shop- pers were still reasonably close to their overall budget ($66.45 planned compared with $69.84 actually spent). Retailers should be able to get the largest benefit by offer- ing unplanned items to shoppers later in their trips, particu- larly when the budget for unplanned items has not been exhausted. That said, we also find that shoppers who have exceeded their trip budget and are still making purchases are prone to make unplanned purchases. In-store sampling or other in-person promotions should be located more deeply in the trip. The licensing effect suggests that an effective merchan- dising strategy would be to mix low- and high-hedonic items. The purchase of a low-hedonic item gives the shop- per permission to make an unplanned purchase, and high- hedonic items are more likely to be unplanned as opposed to planned purchases. However, the licensing effect pertains only to planned purchases, which highlights the benefits that might accrue to more detailed tracking information obtained through mobile shopping apps. A simple mobile app such as the Scan It! app used by Stop & Shop grocery stores in the U.S. Northeast might offer to keep track of shoppers’ budgets by asking them to input their shopping list and trip budget before beginning their shopping trip. Shoppers would scan each item with their phone as they put it into the basket, and the app could track whether the item was planned or unplanned. The app would let shoppers know how much they have spent on planned and unplanned items and how much of their overall budget remains. In addition, with this information and geographic track- ing within the store, the retailer can make more targeted suggestions. For example, the app could alert the shopper to nearby unplanned items following a planned purchase. Fur- thermore, incorporating the effect of trip budgets, for smaller-trip-budget shoppers, suggestions for unplanned items should wait until after several selections have already been made; for medium-trip-budget shoppers, suggestions can start from the beginning of the shopping trip. When a shopper selects a planned, low-hedonic product, a nearby high-hedonic product might be suggested and/or a coupon offered for the item. Coupon offers or product suggestions should be more frequent as the shopping trip progresses as long as the shopper has money left in the shopping budget. Clearly, a balance would need to be struck so that offers are not so frequent as to annoy shoppers. Conversely, consumers should be mindful of their greater propensity to make unplanned purchases as their shopping trip unfolds. Although our research does not investigate whether unplanned purchases are “good” or “bad” from a consumer’s perspective, we note our finding that the cumulative amount spent on unplanned purchases deters additional unplanned versus planned purchases The Role of Within-Trip Dynamics / 71 throughout the shopping trip. That is, making and monitor- ing a mental budget (or using a shopping app) for unplanned purchases during a shopping trip provides the shopper flexibility to react to in-store cues and enjoy the shopping experience while avoiding an unexpectedly large overall expense. Limitations and Further Research The statistical model we used in this research analyzed item-by-item selections to determine whether there are systematic differences between planned and unplanned purchases. Formally, we model Pr(Planned|Selection) and Pr(Unplanned|Selection), the probability of making a planned versus unplanned purchase given that a selection has been observed (i.e., something was put into the shopping basket). Ultimately, retailers are interested in maximizing the total number of purchases, planned and unplanned, which would be given by Pr(Planned|Selection) ¥ Pr(Selection) and Pr(Unplanned|Selection) ¥ Pr(Selection). Our research demonstrates that dynamic factors affect the selection of planned versus unplanned items and suggests that attempts to model whether the consumer will make a planned, an unplanned, or no selection need to consider similar dynam- ics. That is, modeling Pr(Selection) would have to use information collected throughout the shopping trip as opposed to only using information observed when a selec- tion was made. The presence of a significant autocorrelation coefficient suggests that additional behavioral research should be done to more thoroughly explicate the dynamics in shopper pur- chasing behavior. First, although we characterize items as either planned or unplanned, there may be additional under- lying reasons for unplanned purchases that are captured by the autocorrelation. For example, some shoppers may pur- posefully let the store guide them on dinner plans. For these shoppers, the first unplanned item in a meal plan might stimulate additional unplanned purchases. This effect may vary significantly from the sequential effect of purchasing stand-alone unplanned items and would require a compre- hensive analysis of cross-purchases to determine complemen- tary categories. Such a “network analysis” of unplanned purchases is a fertile direction for further research. The expected effects of self-regulation theory pertain to smaller-trip-budget shoppers, whereas cuing theory is more applicable to medium-trip-budget shoppers. Those with the largest spending plans did not react to unplanned purchases. Lee and Ariely (2006) argue that shoppers begin their trip with fuzzy shopping goals that become more concrete as the trip progresses. To the extent that goal concreteness is related to differential cuing of unplanned items, this may be part of the underlying process. Notably, it may be the case that goal concreteness does not change over the course of the shopping trip for shoppers with larger budgets. This would explain our finding that the carryover effect of unplanned purchases on the subsequent purchase is stable throughout the trip and is an intriguing topic for further research. Two other methodological limitations warrant addi- tional attention. First, because shoppers were interviewed before the shopping trip, it is possible that they altered the sequence of planned versus unplanned selections in response to telling the researchers their shopping plans. An alternative methodology would be to interview shoppers as they exit the store and ask them to identify which items were planned or unplanned; however, respondents may be reluctant to admit how many or which items were unplanned (i.e., socially desirable responding). Thus, whether “pre-” or “post-” interviewing shoppers is prefer- able is an open question. Second, our data set did not include information on which items were on display; because previous research has shown that displays are posi- tively related to making unplanned purchases, this may result in an omitted variable bias and may be related to why the price and “on sale” variables were not significant. Because the current analysis conditions on a selection being made and focuses on dynamic effects, we do not believe that the exclusion of promotion variables alters our basic conclusions. Nonetheless, further research should include and test promotion variables. 72 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 In conclusion, our research shows that making planned versus unplanned purchases is a dynamic process that is influenced by the last item purchased, the stage of the shop- ping trip, and shoppers’ goals for the shopping trip. Our research shows that an individual shopper’s prior history can be used to identify items more likely to be bought on a planned versus unplanned basis. To the extent that cus- tomized shopping lists can be created that enhance cus- tomer satisfaction and loyalty, proprietary FSP data have the potential of creating a sustainable competitive advan- tage because they cannot be duplicated by other retailers. Furthermore, our findings can be used to help determine the order in which shoppers’ prior purchases are displayed in the retailer’s mobile app, with categories with the highest likelihood of unplanned purchase being higher on the list. Indeed, this may present another revenue opportunity for retailers because they can auction the order in which previ- ously purchased items are displayed, akin to Google AdWords. That is, consumer packaged goods firms could bid to get their product higher on the list and could weight their bid by the probability of the purchase being planned. Gamerman, Dani and Hedibert F. Lopes (2006), Markov Chain Monte Carlo: Stochastic Simulation for Bayesian Inference. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall. Gelfand, Alan E. and Dipak K. Dey (1994), “Bayesian Model Choice: Asymptotics and Exact Calculations,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 56 (3), 501–514. Geweke, John F., Michael P. Keane, and David E. Runkle (1997), “Statistical Inference in the Multinomial Multiperiod Probit Model,” Journal of Econometrics, 80 (1), 125–65. Gilbride, Timothy J. and Peter J. Lenk (2010), “Posterior Predictive Model Checking: An Application to Multivariate Normal Hetero- geneity,” Journal of Marketing Research, 47 (October), 896–909. Glass, David C., Jerome E. Singer, and Lucy N. Friedman (1969), “Psychic Cost of Adaptation to an Environmental Stressor,” Jour- nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 12 (3), 200–210. Greene, William H. (2000), Econometric Analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. ——— (2010), “Testing Hypotheses About Interaction Terms in Nonlinear Models,” Economic Letters, 107 (2), 291–96. Gupta, Sunil (1988), “Impact of Sales Promotions on When, What, and How Much to Buy,” Journal of Marketing Research, 25 (November), 342–55. Haaijer, Rinus and Michel Wedel (2001), “Habit Persistence in Time Series Models of Discrete Choice,” Marketing Letters, 12 (1), 25–35. Hartley, L.R. (1973), “Effect of Prior Noise or Prior Performance on Serial Reaction,” Journal of Experimental Psychology, 101 (2), 255–61. Heckman, James (1981a), “Heterogeneity and State Dependence,” in Studies in Labor Markets, Sherwin Rosen, ed. Chicago: Uni- versity of Chicago Press. ——— (1981b), “Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data,” in Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Appli- cations, Charles Manski and Daniel McFadden, eds. Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press. Hein, Kenneth (2008), “OgilvyAction’s Roth Explains Shopper Marketing,” AdWeek, (December 18), (accessed February 23, 2015), [available at http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising- branding/ogilvyactions-roth-explains-shopper-marketing- 104960]. REFERENCES Ai, Chunrong and Edward C. Norton (2003), “Interaction Terms in Logit and Probit Models,” Economic Letters, 80 (1), 123–29. Baumeister, Roy F. and Todd F. Heatherton (1996), “Self-Regulation Failure: An Overview,” Psychological Inquiry, 7 (1), 1–15. Bell, David R., Daniel Corsten, and George Knox (2011), “From Point of Purchase to Path to Purchase: How Preshopping Factors Drive Unplanned Buying,” Journal of Marketing, 75 (January), 31–45. Bettman, James R. (1979), “Memory Factors in Consumer Choice: A Review,” Journal of Marketing, 43 (Spring), 37–53. Bresson, Georges, Cheng Hsia, and Alain Pirotte (2011), “Assess- ing the Contribution of R&D to Total Factor Productivity—A Bayesian Approach to Account for Heterogeneity and Het- eroskedasticity,” Advances in Statistical Analysis, 95 (4), 435– 52. Cochran, Winona and Abraham Tesser (1996), “The What the Hell Effect: Some Effects of Goal Proximity and Framing on Per- formance,” in Striving and Feeling: Interaction Among Goals, Feeling and Self-Regulation, Leonard L. Martin and Abraham Tesser, eds. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Collins, Allan M. and Elizabeth F. Loftus (1975), “A Spreading Activation Theory of Semantic Processing,” Psychological Review, 82 (6), 407–428. Dhar, Ravi, Joel Huber, and Uzma Khan (2007), “The Shopping Momentum Effect,” Journal of Marketing Research, 44 (August), 370–78. ——— and Itamar Simonson (1999), “Making Complementary Choices in Consumption Episodes: Highlighting Versus Bal- ancing,” Journal of Marketing Research, 36 (February), 29–44. Evans, Gary W. (1979), “Behavioral and Physiological Conse- quences of Crowding in Humans,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 9 (1), 27–46. Fishbach, Ayelet and Ravi Dhar (2005), “Goals as Excuses or Guides: The Liberating Effect of Perceived Goal Progress on Choice,” Journal of Consumer Research, 32 (3), 370–77. Franses, Philip Hans (1998), Time Series Models for Business and Economic Forecasting. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Hoch, Stephen J. and George F. Loewenstein (1991), “Time- Inconsistent Preferences and Consumer Self-Control,” Journal of Consumer Research, 17 (4), 492–507. Hui, Sam K., Eric T. Bradlow, and Peter S. Fader (2009), “Testing Behavioral Hypotheses Using an Integrated Model of Grocery Store Shopping Path and Purchase Behavior,” Journal of Con- sumer Research, 36 (3), 478–93. ———, Yanliu Huang, Jacob Suher, and J. Jeffrey Inman (2013), “Deconstructing the ‘First Moment of Truth’: Understanding Unplanned Consideration and Purchase Conversion Using In- Store Video Tracking,” Journal of Marketing Research, 50 (August), 445–62. ———, J. Jeffrey Inman, Yanliu Huang, and Jacob A. Suher (2013), “Estimating the Effect of Travel Distance on Unplanned Spending: Applications to Mobile Promotion Strategies,” Jour- nal of Marketing, 77 (March), 1–16. Inman, J. Jeffrey and Russell S. Winer (1998), “Where the Rubber Meets the Road: A Model of In-Store Consumer Decision- Making,” Marketing Science Institute Report 98-122. ———, ———, and Rosellina Ferraro (2009), “The Interplay Between Category Characteristics, Customer Characteristics, and Customer Activities on In-Store Decision Making,” Jour- nal of Marketing, 73 (September), 19–29. Judge, George C., R. Carter Hill, William E. Griffiths, Helmut Lutkepohl, and Tsoung-Chao Lee (1988), Introduction to the Theory and Practice of Econometrics. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Keane, Michael P. (1997), “Modeling Heterogeneity and State Dependence in Consumer Choice Behavior,” Journal of Busi- ness & Economic Statistics, 15 (3), 310–27. Khan, Uzma and Ravi Dhar (2006), “Licensing Effect in Con- sumer Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research, 43 (May), 259–66. Knox, George, David R. Bell, and Daniel Corsten (2011), “Situa- tional Determinants of Unplanned Buying in Emerging and Developed Markets,” Report No. 11-114, Marketing Science Institute Working Paper Series 2011. Kollat, David T. and Ronald P. Willett (1967), “Customer Impulse Purchasing Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research, 4 (Feb- ruary), 21–31. Kumar, V., Rajkumar Venkatesan, Timothy R. Bohling, and Denise Beckmann (2008), “The Power of CLV: Managing Cus- tomer Lifetime Value at IBM,” Marketing Science, 27 (4), 585–99. Lee, Leonard and Dan Ariely (2006), “Shopping Goals, Goal Con- creteness, and Conditional Promotions,” Journal of Consumer Research, 33 (1), 60–70. Lenk, Peter J. and Wayne S. DeSarbo (2000), “Bayesian Inference for Finite Mixtures of Generalized Linear Models with Ran- dom Effects,” Psychometrika, 65 (1), 93–119. Lucas, Jim (2012), “Shopper Marketing, the Discipline, the Approach,” in Shopper Marketing: How to Increase Purchase Decisions at the Point of Sale, Markus Ståhlberg and Ville Maila, eds. London: Kogan Page. Lynch, John G., Jr. and Thomas K. Srull (1982), “Memory and Attentional Factors in Consumer Choice: Concepts and Research Methods,” Journal of Consumer Research, 9 (1), 18– 36. Miller, George A. (1956), “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information,” Psychological Review, 63, 81–97. Mukopadhyay, Anirban and Gita Venkatramani Johar (2007), “Tempted or Not? The Effect of Recent Purchase History on Responses to Affective Advertising,” Journal of Consumer Research, 33 (4), 445–53. The Role of Within-Trip Dynamics / 73 Muraven, Mark and Roy F. Baumeister (2000), “Self-Regulation and Depletion of Limited Resources: Does Self-Control Resemble a Muscle?” Psychological Bulletin, 126 (2), 247–59. Park, C. Whan, Easwar S. Iyer, and Daniel C. Smith (1989), “The Effects of Situational Factors on In-Store Grocery Shopping Behavior: The Role of Store Environment and Time Available for Shopping,” Journal of Consumer Research, 15 (4), 422–33. Posavac, Steven S., David M. Sanbonmatsu, and Russell H. Fazio (1997), “Considering the Best Choice: Effects of the Salience and Accessibility of Alternatives on Attitude–Decision Consis- tency,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72 (2), 253–61. Ratcliff, Roger and Gail McKoon (1988), “A Retrieval Theory of Priming in Memory,” Psychological Review, 95 (3), 385–408. Rook, Dennis W. (1987), “The Buying Impulse,” Journal of Con- sumer Research, 14 (2), 189–99. Sayette, Michael A. (2004), “Self-Regulation Failure and Addic- tion,” in Handbook of Self-Regulation: Research, Theory, and Applications, Roy F. Baumeister and Kathleen D. Vohs, eds. New York: Guilford Press, 447–65. Seetharaman, P.B. (2004), “Modeling Multiple Sources of State Dependence in Random Utility Models: A Distributed Lag Approach,” Marketing Science, 23 (2), 263–71. Sherrod, Drury R. (1974), “Crowding, Perceived Control and Behavioral After-Effects,” Journal of Applied Social Psychol- ogy, 4 (2), 171–86. Shiv, Baba and Sasha Fedorikhin (1999), “Heart and Mind in Con- flict: The Interplay of Affect and Cognition in Consumer Deci- sion Making,” Journal of Consumer Research, 26 (3), 278–92. Soman, Dilip and Amar Cheema (2004), “When Goals Are Coun- terproductive: The Effect of Violation of a Behavioral Goal on Subsequent Performance,” Journal of Consumer Research, 31 (1), 52–62. Stewart, Mark (2006), “Maximum Simulated Likelihood Estima- tion of Random-Effects Dynamic Probit Models with Autocor- related Errors,” Stata Journal, 6 (2), 256–72. Stilley, Karen M., J. Jeffrey Inman, and Kirk L. Wakefield (2010a), “Planning to Make Unplanned Purchases? The Role of In-Store Slack and Budget Deviation,” Journal of Consumer Research, 37 (2), 264–78. ———, ———, and ——— (2010b), “Spending on the Fly: Mental Budgets, Promotions, and Spending Behavior,” Journal of Marketing, 74 (May), 34–47. Symphony IRI Group (2012), “Shopper Marketing: Every Decision Begins and Ends with the Shopper,” report, (May 29), (accessed February 23, 2015), [available at http://www.iriworldwide. com/NewsEvents/LatestPublications/ctl/Details/mid/ 1112/ ItemID/ 1485.aspx]. Train, Kenneth E. (2003), Discrete Choice Methods with Simula- tion. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Vohs, Kathleen D. and Ronald J. Faber (2007), “Spent Resources: Self-Regulation Resource Availability Affects Impulsive Buy- ing,” Journal of Consumer Research, 33 (4), 537–47. ——— and Todd F. Heatherton (2000), “Self-Regulation Failure: A Resource-Depletion Approach,” Psychological Science, 11 (3), 249–54. Wakefield, Kirk L. and J. Jeffrey Inman (2003), “Situational Price Sensitivity: The Role of Consumption Occasion, Social Con- text and Income,” Journal of Retailing, 79 (4), 199–212. Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (2010), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Probit Data, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Zhang, Xiaoling, Shibo Li, Raymond R. Burke, and Alex Leykin (2014), “An Examination of Social Influence on Shopper Behavior Using Video Tracking Data,” Journal of Marketing, 78 (September), 24–41. WEB APPENDIX The Role of Within-Trip Dynamics In Unplanned Versus Planned Purchase Behavior Timothy J. Gilbride J. Jeffrey Inman Karen Melville Stilley WEB APPENDIX: ESTIMATION ALGORITHM To estimate the serially correlated probit model described in the paper we rely on Bayesian methods using data augmentation. Data augmentation and exploiting conditional relationships greatly simplifies estimation. Our approach draws heavily on the presentation by Huang and Shen (2002). The model for each item selected is: (A1) * * ' 2 , 1 1 if 0, else 0 where ~ (0,1 ) in in in in i in in in i n in in y y y y x N β e e fe n n f− = > = = + = + − where yin = 1 if the nth purchase of shopper i is unplanned and for each shopper we observe ni purchases. The vector xin contains an intercept, explanatory variables, and any lagged terms including yi,n-1 to represent state dependence. Unlike other time series models in the literature, we have a finite shopping sequence with a definitive beginning and ending. For the first unplanned purchase, we set yi,0 = 0. However, we assume environmental factors up to the first purchase may have an impact on subsequent behavior and assume εi0 ~ N(0,1). The remainder of the model hierarchy is given by: (A2) ~ ( , ) ~ (0,100 ) ~ ( 3, ( 3) ) ~ ( 1,1) i p p p p N V N I V IW p p I Uniform β β β β β f + + − ) where p is the dimension of xin, Np signifies a multivariate normal distribution of dimension p, IW is the Inverse Wishart distribution, and Ip is an identity matrix of dimension p. Let Xi represent the stacked matrix of {xin′} and yi the vector of observed outcomes. The algorithm is initialized with the estimates: ' 1 ' * ' ( ) for each for each and i i i i i in in i in X X X y i y x i n β e β −= = − and ϕ=0. The following steps describe an MCMC chain with the posterior distribution of all model parameters as the stationary distribution. 1. Draw * *| , , ,in i i iy y e β f for each i and n If yin = 1, * 2 *~ ( , , 0)in in in iny TN yµ τ > , if yin = 0, * 2 *~ ( , , 0)in in in iny TN yµ τ < where TN indicates a truncated normal distribution. If n=1, 2 21 1iτ f= − and * ' 1 2 1i i i ixµ fe β= + ; if 1<n<ni 2 2 2 1 1in fτ f − = + and * * , 1 , 1 ' 2 21 1 i n i n in i inx fe fe µ β f f − += + + + + ; if n = ni 2 21inτ f= − and * ' , 1in i n i inxµ fe β−= + . Compute * * 'in in i iny xe β= − . Note that these distributions can be obtained by re-writing the latent variables as: ( ) ( ) * ' 1 1 0 1 * ' * ' 2 2 1 1 2 * ' * ' 3 3 2 2 3 . i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i y x y x y x y x y x etc β fe n β f β n β f β n = + + = + − + = + − + and recognizing that the draw of *iny involves both * iny and * , 1i ny + and therefore * , 1i ne − and * , 1i ne + . 2. Draw *| ,i iyβ f for each i Compute * *1 1i iz y= and * 1 1i ix x= . Compute * * , 1* 21 in i n in y y z f f −−= − and , 1* 21 in i n in x x x f f −−= − for remaining ni. ( ) ( ) ( ) 11 * * * * 1 ~ , ' ' . i p i i i i N b D D V X X b D X z V β β β β −− − = + = + 3. Draw ϕ|{yi}, { *ie }, {βi} Because ϕ ~ Uniform(-1,1), we use a random walk Metropolis-Hastings algorithm which, conditional on the { *ie } is straightforward to compute. Let ϕ(o) be the current draw and ϕ(c) = ϕ(o) + η be candidate where η ~ N(0, σ2) and σ2 is chosen so that the acceptance rate is approximately 50%. Define ( ) '1 1 c i i ixx β= and ( ) * , 1( ) ' 21 c i nc in i inx f e x β f −= + − , then the likelihood for shopper i is given by ( ) ( ) ( )1( ) ( ) ( ) 1 1 i in in n y yc c c i in in n L x x − =    = Φ −Φ   ∏ where ( )Φ represents the standard normal cumulative distribution. Define ( )oiL analogously. Then, accept the candidate or new draw of ϕ(c) with probability: ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ( 1 1) min ,1 ( 1 1) I c i c i I o i o i L L c f c f = =   − < <     − < <    ∏ ∏ where χ() is the indicator function. Draws of β and Vβ are standard and details can be found in references such as Rossi, Allenby, and McCulloch (2005). Changes for the model with shopping variables are straightforward and are not detailed here. Full Model with Individual Level Variance In the Full Model, the distribution of heterogeneity is given by: ' 2 0 1 ~ ( , ) [{ }, ] ~ ( , ) i o i i i i p i N w N w β θ σ β γ θ− ∆ (A3) Where θo is vector, 2iσ is an individual level scalar for the variance, θ is a matrix of regression coefficients, and ∆ is a covariance matrix. We specify priors as: 2 2 2 2 ( 1) 2 ( 1) 2 ( 1) ~ (0,100 ) 4 1~ ( , ) 2 2 [ ] ~ N (0,100 ) ~ (( 1) 3, (( 1) 3) ) o i p p p N I IG vec I IW p p I θ σ θ × − × − × −∆ − + − + (A4) Here IG represents the Inverse-Gamma distribution. With modifications for the probit model and the explanatory variables in the distribution of heterogeneity, the model follows that of Bresson, Hsia, and Pirotte (2011). 1. Draw * *| , , ,in i i iy y e β f for each i and n >1 This step is the same as for the earlier model, but no value is drawn for *1iy 2. Draw *| , ,i io iyβ β f for each i Compute * * , 1* * 0 ,121 in i n in i in y y z x f β f −−= − − and , 1* 21 in i n in x x x f f −−= − for each ni > 1. ( ) ( ) ( ) 11 * * * * 1 ~ , ' ' . i p i i i i i N b D D X X b D X z w β θ −− − = ∆ + = + ∆ Draw *| , ,io i iyβ β f for each i Compute * * , 1* 21 in i n in y y z f f −−= − and , 1* 21 in i n in x x x f f −−= − for each ni > 1. ( ) ( ) 2 2 ' * * 2 ~ , 1 ' . io i i i i o i i i i i N b d d t wb d t y x β σ σ θβ σ   =  +    = − +    Here ti = ni - 1 3. Draw ϕ|{yi}, { *ie }, {βi} Again, this draw is the same as above but excludes the first observation for each shopper. 4. Draw 2 | , ,i io o iwσ β θ ( )2 1 '4~ ( , ) 2 2 i io i oi i t wtIG β θ σ + −+ 5. Draw 2|{ },{ },{ }o io i iwθ β σ ( ) 1' 1 2 2 1 ' 1 22 1 ~ , 100 100 0 . o p N i i i i N i io i i N b D w wD I wb D I θ σ β σ − − = − =   = +      = + ×    ∑ ∑ Draws of θ and Δ are standard and details can be found in references such as Rossi, Allenby, and McCulloch (2005). Copyright of Journal of Marketing is the property of American Marketing Association and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.