Liu_JournMarket_2015_9DZl.pdf
atckSKLHeHe1N8HFQzMyCnVaONzC-Liu_JournMarket_2015_9DZl.pdf.plain.html

74 Journal of Marketing Vol. 79 (May 2015), 74 –90 © 2015, American Marketing Association ISSN: 0022-2429 (print), 1547-7185 (electronic) Peggy J. Liu, Cait Lamberton, & Kelly L. Haws Should Firms Use Small Financial Benefits to Express Appreciation to Consumers? Understanding and Avoiding Trivialization Effects Firms commonly add small financial benefits to communications designed to acknowledge consumers’ loyalty or support. Yet is it always better to provide some financial benefit as opposed to simply saying “thank you”? Although this question has important implications for customer relationship management, research has not yet provided an answer. This article demonstrates that, indeed, a financial acknowledgment (defined as an acknowledgment with a monetary benefit) can lead to less positive outcomes than offering a verbal acknowledgment (defined as an acknowledgment without a monetary benefit), a phenomenon termed the “trivialization effect.” The results explain this effect in terms of shifting evaluation standards: whereas a verbal acknowledgement is evaluated relative to verbal gratitude expression norms, a financial acknowledgment is evaluated relative to both verbal norms and customers’ monetary expectations. The authors also demonstrate two practical, theory-consistent ways firms can structure financial acknowledgments to eliminate the trivialization effect. Thus, this research shows both the peril of small financial benefits as a means of expressing customer appreciation and practical, low-cost ways to salvage their potential. Keywords: customer appreciation, customer relationship management, firm–consumer relationship, trivialization, compensation, benefit, gratitude Online Supplement: http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jm.14.0091 Peggy J. Liu is a doctoral student, Marketing Department, Fuqua School of Business, Duke University (e-mail: peggy.liu@duke.edu). Cait Lamber- ton is Associate Professor of Business Administration, Marketing and Business Economics Department, Katz School of Business, University of Pittsburgh (e-mail: clamberton@katz.pitt.edu). Kelly L. Haws is Associate Professor of Marketing, Owen Graduate School of Management, Vander- bilt University (e-mail: kelly.haws@vanderbilt.edu). The authors thank Carl Mela and Christine Moorman for helpful comments on a prior version of this article; Gavan Fitzsimons for helping connect them with the hotel con- ference center at which Study 1a was conducted; the management team and staff at the hotel conference center for facilitating Study 1a; and Keri Dickens, Diana Mao, Alison Mayer, and Aline Swiec for research assis- tance. Alexander Chernev served as area editor for this article. Firms often thank their loyal customers by offeringacknowledgments that include small financial bene-fits (Lyon 2012; O’Malley 1998; skh 2013). Firms presumably provide these financial benefits believing that they will make customers feel appreciated, a fundamental component of relational satisfaction (Reis et al. 2000) that is linked to long-term commitment in marketing channel relationships (Geyskens, Steenkamp, and Kumar 1999; Hoffman and Lowitt 2008). This belief is echoed by an entrepreneur organization, which advises, “If your cus- tomers have been loyally paying you, then rewarding them with even a small discount can sometimes produce huge amounts of goodwill. Receiving something of real tangible value that they weren’t expecting is the easiest way to delight customers” (Young Entrepreneur Council 2014). This more-is-better principle has been assumed to apply even when financial benefits are very small (indeed, close to negligible). For example, Microsoft recently sent loyal Xbox customers a birthday e-card with a gift of 20 Microsoft points (worth $.25) to express its appreciation (Co 2012). However, in the present research, we argue that the more-is-better principle does not apply when financial benefits are very small (i.e., too small to meet consumers’ expectations). Rather, when financial benefits are smaller than expected, the inclusion of a financial benefit can actu- ally subtract from, rather than add to, customer goodwill. Surprisingly, virtually no prior academic research has examined when and why financial acknowledgments (defined as marketing activities that acknowledge desirable consumer behaviors and offer a monetary benefit) are coun- terproductive in communicating appreciation relative to verbal acknowledgments (defined as marketing activities that acknowledge desirable consumer behaviors but do not offer a monetary benefit).1 1The present research operationalizes financial acknowledgments as financial benefits that are accompanied by a verbal acknowledg- ment (e.g., a thank-you note offering a small financial benefit). How- ever, further research could examine the effectiveness of financial benefits that are not accompanied by any verbal acknowledgment. Should Firms Use Small Financial Benefits? / 75 In the present research, we provide evidence that small financial benefits sometimes backfire, despite the intuitive suggestion that they should lead consumers to feel as appre- ciated, if not more appreciated, than if they were to receive no financial benefit. That is, relative to a verbal acknowl- edgment, a financial acknowledgment with similar verbal message content can make recipients feel less appreciated and satisfied. We term this effect the “trivialization effect,” in line with the notion that a small financial benefit may devalue or “trivialize” consumers’ contributions to or rela- tionship with the firm. Furthermore, we propose that the trivialization effect occurs because including a financial benefit prompts consumers to evaluate the firm’s communi- cations in light of its adherence to both verbal and financial norms. Accordingly, when a financial benefit does not meet financial norms or expectations, its inclusion can backfire. Next, we elaborate on the theoretical rationale for our hypotheses. Theoretical Framework The Trivialization Effect Classic expectancy disconfirmation theory suggests that, if financially feasible, a firm should meet or exceed con- sumers’ expectations about how much financial benefit they are due. The closer a firm comes to meeting such expecta- tions, the more appreciated consumers will feel, and the greater their satisfaction will be with the firm’s action (Oliver 1977; Oliver, Balakrishnan, and Barry 1994; Weaver and Brickman 1974). A firm may therefore conclude that any financial benefit greater than zero should provide some modicum of satisfaction relative to no financial benefit because it is objectively closer to such expectations than is zero. Indeed, a savvy marketer may intuit that small finan- cial benefits could take advantage of the steepest portion of the prospect theory curve (Kahneman and Tversky 1979), leading to an increase in satisfaction disproportionate to the amount provided. However, other research raises questions about whether a message involving small financial benefits will always be more positively viewed than a message involving zero financial benefit. Although it differs in the mechanism and contexts in which it operates, such research has shown rejection of small financial amounts. For example, research in economics has shown that giving paid research partici- pants additional performance-contingent bonuses may undermine performance (Ariely, Bracha, and Meier 2009; Gneezy and Rustichini 2000). This effect has been explained both in terms of the negative effect of monetary rewards on intrinsic motivation and in terms of an “incom- plete contract” whereby participants who do not receive additional performance-contingent bonuses may interpret the relatively high non-performance-contingent research payment as their payment for implicitly agreeing to perform well (Gneezy and Rustichini 2000). In the context of incen- tivizing charitable giving, this effect has been explained in terms of performance-contingent bonuses diluting the sig- naling value of prosocial behavior, at least in public con- texts (Ariely, Bracha, and Meier 2009). Similarly, work in ultimatum games has shown that “petty” offers—those in which someone is offered less than 20% of a pot of money—are often rejected (Sunstein 1996). This effect is typically explained in terms of the petty offer’s relationship to a norm-based reference point of a fifty-fifty split. That is, the recipient’s reference point is an even division of resources, rather than zero, and the recipient decides that receiving zero is not worse than receiving 20%. Altogether, such research suggests that some money is not always preferred to no money, though multiple explana- tions for such an effect exist. Importantly, none of this pre- vious research has occurred in the marketing context of acknowledging consumers for efforts they have already voluntarily expended. Instead, prior research has primarily studied the effect of small incentives on motivation (Ariely, Bracha, and Meier 2009; Gneezy and Rustichini 2000). In our context, people decide on their own how much effort to expend toward helping the firm; we do not alter a priori extrinsic or intrinsic motivation. Moreover, we do not alter whether the firm’s acknowledgments are public or private; all acknowledgments are private in our research.2 Our focus on firm acknowledgments for voluntarily expended effort is valuable because communicating appreciation is a critical part of customer relationship management in many market- ing contexts. To the extent that gratitude is appropriately expressed, consumers are likely to be willing to engage in a deeper relationship with the firm (Algoe, Fredrickson, and Gable 2013). Thus, the key element in determining the wis- dom of marketing expenditure lies in consumers’ evaluation of these appreciation efforts. To predict these evaluations, we must draw on a differ- ent theoretical basis than that used in prior work. Specifi- cally, we base our prediction on the idea that evaluations of single-component (as opposed to multicomponent) stimuli differ and that multicomponent stimuli are often evaluated according to an averaging model (Anderson 1965; Gaeth et al. 1990; Weaver, Garcia, and Schwarz 2012; Yadav 1994). First, consider how consumers may evaluate an acknowledg- ment of effort or loyalty that involves only verbal gratitude, thus offering zero financial benefit. In our context, verbal acknowledgments may be considered single-component acknowledgments. When consumers receive a verbal acknowledgment, their responses are likely to be based pri- marily on whether the acknowledgment adequately meets norms associated with appropriately expressing verbal gratitude, which are fairly well-defined in Western culture (Hilton 1995). For example, consumers may evaluate whether the acknowledgment conforms to prototypical gratitude expressions by accurately honoring their contribu- tion and expressing sincere gratitude (Lambert, Graham, and Fincham 2009). Importantly, the norms of expressing 2Indeed, whereas Ariely, Bracha, and Meier (2009) find that small incentives are detrimental to motivation when offered in public but beneficial when offered in private, we propose that even privately offered firm acknowledgments may have a trivializing effect. verbal gratitude do not require that the expresser provide some form of financial benefit. Indeed, research shows that simple expressions of gratitude have strong positive effects on people (Grant and Gino 2010). Expressions need only adhere to verbal norms to prompt positive customer responses (Algoe, Fredrickson, and Gable 2013). Thus, consumers will evaluate verbal acknowledgments accord- ing to adherence to verbal norms alone. In contrast, financial acknowledgments may be consid- ered multicomponent stimuli. Assuming an averaging model consistent with previous research on evaluation of multicomponent stimuli (Anderson 1965; Gaeth et al. 1990; Weaver, Garcia, and Schwarz 2012; Yadav 1994), con- sumers will likely evaluate such messages as an average of adherence to verbal norms and the extent to which the financial benefit meets financial benefit expectations. Importantly, evaluations of the financial benefit may be negative (in the case of trivializing compensation), not posi- tive. Specifically, rather than compare the received financial benefit with a reference point of zero financial benefit, con- sumers may compare the received benefit with a higher expectations-based reference point. When the benefit falls short of expectations, consumers may evaluate it as negative. This comparison with a nonzero reference point is likely facilitated by the notion that people expect to be com- pensated in proportion to how much time, effort, and bene- fit they have provided in employment contexts (Basu et al. 1985; Charness 2004) or, more generally, in line with views of fairness in transactions (Adams 1963, 1965; Haws and Bearden 2006; Van den Bos et al. 1997). This quantitative expectation may vary on the basis of factors such as the consumer’s personal experiences and beliefs about environ- mental norms (Adaval and Wyer 2011; Boulding et al. 1993; Epley and Gilovich 2010; Okada and Hoch 2004). However, once evoked, the expectation is likely to be greater than zero: people place a high value on their time and effort (Okada and Hoch 2004; Saini and Monga 2008) and are likely to anticipate commensurate financial benefits (Adams 1963, 1965; Basu et al. 1985; Charness 2004). In summary, we propose that standards for evaluating firms’ efforts to express appreciation to consumers depend on whether the firm offers a verbal or financial acknowl- edgment. Because a message conferring zero financial benefit is evaluated relative to verbal standards alone, it can meet expectations quite adequately. However, because it is evaluated relative to both financial benefit expectations and verbal standards, a message that conforms to verbal stan- dards (leading to a positive evaluation) but does not con- form to financial benefit expectations (leading to a negative evaluation) will lead to less satisfaction than the message without a small financial benefit. For example, consider a consumer who receives only a verbal acknowledgment that effectively communicates gratitude. Given that this message meets verbal norms, the consumer should evaluate it positively. Next, consider that the firm decides to add a small financial benefit to this mes- sage. Although this financial benefit objectively makes the consumer better off than she was before (i.e., it is objec- tively closer to her quantitative expectations than is the zero amount received in the prior case), she will evaluate it negatively if it does not match the amount she would expect for her time or effort. The average of the positive evaluation verbal component and the negative evaluation of the financial component will be lower than the consumer’s positive evalua- tion of the verbal acknowledgment alone. This difference in evaluation is the trivialization effect—the extent to which adding a financial benefit to a verbal acknowledgment reduces consumers’ felt appreciation. The term “trivializing compensation” refers to such smaller-than-expected monetary benefit amounts. Formally, assuming that the message content adheres to verbal norms and thus is evaluated positively, H1: Consumers feel more appreciated by a firm when they receive a verbal acknowledgment rather than a similarly worded financial acknowledgment with trivializing compensation. As we have stated, H1 assumes that the message content adheres to verbal norms. However, firms’ messages may fail to conform to verbal norms. Examining nonconforming verbal messages enables us to further test our theoretical account, which predicts that H1 will be less likely to occur if message content does not adhere to verbal norms. The rationale is that a consumer will evaluate verbal message content simply on the basis of its conformance to verbal norms. Therefore, when the message content does not con- form to verbal norms, a verbal acknowledgment has a nega- tive evaluation. If the financial acknowledgment again con- tains a smaller-than-expected financial benefit, the financial benefit will be negatively evaluated. Using the same aver- aging model as before, we find that the trivialization effect is less likely to occur in the presence of verbal norm adher- ent messaging. Specifically, the average of a negative ver- bal component and a negative financial component is unlikely to be lower than the consumer’s negative evalua- tion of the verbal acknowledgment alone. Formally, H2a: The trivialization effect is mitigated when message con- tent fails to conform to verbal norms. Again, H1 assumes that the financial benefit is smaller than expected (i.e., trivializing compensation). Yet firms can also offer financial benefits that meet expectations. Financial benefits that meet expectations should be posi- tively evaluated. Thus, the trivialization effect should be mitigated: the average of a positive verbal component and a positive financial component is unlikely to be lower than the consumer’s positive evaluation of the verbal acknowl- edgment alone. Indeed, the trivialization effect can even be reversed if the financial benefit is large enough that it exceeds expectations because its evaluation will be positive enough to raise the overall average evaluation score for the financial acknowledgment. Formally, H2b: The trivialization effect is mitigated (or reversed) when a financial benefit amount meets or exceeds expectations. 76 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 Should Firms Use Small Financial Benefits? / 77 How Can Firms Create Felt Appreciation with Small Financial Benefits? Both H1 and H2a–b draw on the theory that consumers’ evaluations of a financial acknowledgment are based on both adherence to verbal norms and meeting financial bene- fit expectations. This theory suggests that if marketers can strategically alter the financial benefit reference point that consumers use, they can encourage more positive evalua- tions of small monetary benefits and therefore mitigate the trivialization effect. We consider such strategies next. First, firms should be able to mitigate trivialization effects if they can anchor consumers’ financial reference points at values lower than the received financial benefit. To do so, the firm may make the possibility of lower bene- fits salient to consumers. In such cases, consumers will be encouraged to adopt a comparative or “joint evaluation” mode (Hsee 1996; Hsee et al. 1999; Tanner 2008), evaluat- ing the financial benefit offered by the firm relative to the possibility of lower outcomes rather than considering it in isolation, relative to their own (likely higher) expectations. Practically, the possibility of lower benefits can be made salient by couching a small monetary reward in terms of a range of possible rewards (e.g., “To thank you for your loy- alty, the underlined discount is the amount you will receive: 1%, 2%, 3%, 4%, or 5% off a future purchase,” wherein a 5% discount might otherwise have been perceived as failing to meet expectations).3 Second, our theory suggests that the trivialization effect may be mitigated if the monetary benefit is offered in a form that is not naturally evaluated according to a higher financial benefit reference point. Specifically, we suggest that firms can offer the small benefit in a prosocial form, in which the benefit is directed at a worthy charity on the con- sumer’s behalf. Here, we build on recent work showing that prosocial spending leads to greater happiness than equiva- lent amounts of spending on the self (Anik et al. 2013; Dunn, Aknin, and Norton 2008). Of particular relevance, research has shown that prosocial bonuses (bonuses given to others) can lead employees to feel more satisfied than traditional bonuses (Anik et al. 2013). Importantly, utility derived from giving prosocial bene- fits seems to be fairly insensitive to the financial benefit amount actually provided (Hsee and Rottenstreich 2004; Imas 2014; Small, Loewenstein, and Slovic 2007), suggest- ing that consumers pay relatively little attention to evaluat- ing the amount of the financial benefit. Indeed, people may evaluate prosocial benefits according to low reference points. For example, in the context of fundraising cam- paigns, one often hears variations on the phrase “even a penny helps” (Cialdini and Schroeder 1976; Estrin 2013), both suggesting that a low financial reference point may govern evaluation of prosocial offers and emphasizing the power of many small amounts to accumulate toward a cause. Formally, H3: The trivialization effect can be mitigated by lowering the financial benefit reference point consumers use to evalu- ate the financial benefit offered. We operationalize the provision of lower financial benefit reference points in two ways: by displaying a range of pos- sible financial benefits that can be offered and by providing the financial benefit in a prosocial form. Overview of Studies We explore our hypotheses in seven studies. Across all studies, we focus on the effects of financial (vs. verbal) acknowledgments on felt appreciation and satisfaction in the context of acknowledging customers for firm-beneficial behavior. In all studies, we control for the message content across the verbal and financial acknowledgments being compared to help isolate the impact of making an acknowl- edgment financial as opposed to verbal. Studies 1a–1c provide initial demonstrations of the trivialization effect across a range of actual customer appre- ciation contexts (H1), controlling for message content. Studies 2a and 2b provide support for our proposed theory underlying the trivialization effect by demonstrating the impact of varying adherence to different types of standards (verbal gratitude norms and financial benefit expectations) on the trivialization effect. Study 2a shows that when mes- sages fail to adhere to verbal norms, the trivialization effect no longer occurs (H2a). Study 2b shows that if financial expectations are met or exceeded, the trivialization effect no longer occurs or is reversed (H2b). Finally, Studies 3 and 4 examine two ways in which firms can mitigate the trivialization effect while continuing to use adherent message content and small financial bene- fits, providing tests of H3. Study 3 provides an alternative financial benefit reference point to consumers by introduc- ing the possibility of lower benefit amounts through the comparative or joint evaluation context of displaying a range of possible outcomes. Study 4 provides the financial benefit in a prosocial form (the financial benefit is donated to charity), for which the reference point tends to be very low. Thus, both Studies 3 and 4 offer theory grounded and practically useful ways in which managers can reclaim the upside of small financial benefits. Establishing the Trivialization Effect: Studies 1a–1c Studies 1a–1c demonstrate the trivialization effect, provid- ing robust evidence for H1. All three studies were con- ducted in the field, using either a physical business location (i.e., a hotel conference center [Study 1a] and a dining establishment [Study 1c]) or an online context (Study 1b) with real financial rewards. In all three studies, we designed the verbal acknowledgments to conform to gratitude 3Note that if couching small monetary rewards in terms of a range of possible outcomes, firms should manage the distribution of rewards such that most customers will be given a reference point lower than the amount they actually receive. expression norms and selected the financial benefit amounts to be lower than financial benefit expectations.4 Study 1a (“Hotel Field Study”) captured data from hotel guests who were asked to write a review of their stay. Partici- pants received either a verbal acknowledgment or a finan- cial acknowledgment (with a small financial benefit of $.05). Study 1b (“Competitor Feedback Study”) was designed to provide further evidence of the trivialization effect in another field study. In this case, the firm offering an acknowledgment was previously unknown to the partici- pants, and therefore, no prior impressions of the firm could influence responses to the acknowledgment. Study 1c (“Dining Establishment Field Study”) pro- vides evidence of the robustness of the trivialization effect to a change in wording. Specifically, when comparing a ver- bal acknowledgment with a financial acknowledgment in each study, we control for the verbal content as much as possible across the two acknowledgment types such that the only factor differentiating the two types is the presence or absence of a financial benefit. There are two methods to control for the verbal content across verbal and financial acknowledgments. The first method, which we use in Stud- ies 1a and 1b (and Studies 2a, 2b, and 4), keeps the number of sentences constant across acknowledgment types. The second method creates the financial acknowledgment by adding a sentence conveying the addition of a financial benefit. We used this additional sentence method in Studies 1c and 3 and show that the trivialization effect seems robust to both methods of controlling for verbal content. Method Study 1a. Forty-nine guests (67.3% female; Mage = 41.55 years) at a full-service hotel conference center completed this study in June and July 2014. Two additional partici- pants provided a review but left the study before answering any of the dependent variable questions; thus, their data could not be analyzed. Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: verbal acknowledgment or finan- cial acknowledgment of $.05. In collaboration with the conference center, researchers set up laptop survey stations outside the dining room. As guests walked past, researchers asked if they would be will- ing to complete a customer review of the conference center. Because each guest often walked past the survey stations multiple times a day for multiple days, we ensured that each participant only participated once but were unable to assess accurate participation rates. Guests who agreed to provide a customer review answered a series of questions about aspects of the confer- ence center they liked and disliked. They also wrote a review of the conference center for potential future guests (for the customer review questions, see Web Appendix W1). On average, participants wrote 53.45 words (SD = 24.58; Mdn = 50 words) to address the free-response questions (liked aspects, disliked aspects, and customer review). Participants were then told that the conference center would like the researchers to pass on a note to those guests who provided a customer review. Participants then saw a note that either thanked them (verbal acknowledgment con- dition) or thanked them and gave them $.05 (financial acknowledgment condition). For the notes, see Appendix A. The dependent variable consisted of three items to capture how appreciated participants felt as a result of the firm’s actions (for items, see Web Appendix W2). Given that these items were highly correlated (Cronbach’s a = .96), we aver- aged them to form an appreciation index.5 Finally, participants were debriefed about the purpose of the study and given a piece of chocolate to help ensure that they would not leave the study feeling unappreciated. (We asked participants to put the piece of chocolate away immediately after they received it so that other participants would not enter the study expecting to receive chocolate.) Study 1b. One hundred fifty participants (44.7% female; Mage = 33.60 years) from Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) panel were recruited to participate in a study 78 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 5We measure consumers’ satisfaction with a firm’s customer appre- ciation gesture. As such, consumers’ satisfaction should be highly correlated with their felt appreciation. Nonetheless, we recognize that appreciation and satisfaction are distinct constructs; accordingly, we verified that the general pattern of results holds with all three measures in the appreciation index in Studies 1a–1c, 2a, 3, and 4. 4In separate pretests, we confirmed that the verbal acknowledg- ments used in Studies 1a, 1b, 2b, 3, and 4 adhered to verbal grati- tude expression norms. In five pretests, participants (ranging from N = 49 to N = 50) from Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) panel saw either the same scenario as participants in the main study (Studies 2b and 3) or a description of the real situation faced by participants in the main study (Studies 1a, 1b, and 4). They then viewed the acknowledgment note used in the studies and rated the note on two seven-point items measuring adherence to verbal gratitude expression norms (the same items were used in Study 2a to measure adherence to verbal norms). These two items were significantly correlated (r = .45, p < .001); thus, we averaged them to form an adherence to verbal gratitude expression norms index. For all five pretests, we then confirmed that index scores were greater than the midpoint of the scale (4.0) according to one- sample t-tests (ps < .001). We also confirmed that the verbal acknowledgments used in Study 1c and in Study 2a’s adherent to verbal norms condition adhered to verbal gratitude expression norms by asking participants in the main study to rate the note on these two seven-point items after they had already answered the dependent variable questions. In both cases, the index scores were greater than the midpoint of the scale (4.0) according to one-sample t-tests (p < .001). With regard to the financial benefit amount selected in Studies 1a and 1c, we selected $.05 as an amount that we thought would not meet expectations for the majority of participants for Studies 1a and 1c, which were conducted in person with actual hotel conference center and dining establishment customers. With regard to the financial benefit amount selected in Studies 1b, 2a, and 4, we selected $.01 as an amount that we thought would not meet expectations for the majority of participants because MTurk partici- pants are used to receiving relatively small financial compensation (often mere cents). At the end of Study 1b, we asked participants in the verbal acknowledgment condition how much of a bonus they would expect to receive from Pure Coffee & Tea to thank them for providing feedback on their competitors’ websites. Almost all partici- pants listed an expected bonus greater than $.01. Finally, with regard to the financial benefit amount selected in Studies 2b and 3, we con- ducted a pretest to establish participants’ financial benefit expecta- tions (the pretest is described in the Study 2b “Methods” subsection). Should Firms Use Small Financial Benefits? / 79 ostensibly about the participants and their attitudes toward various decisions. Recent research has shown that the MTurk panel is demographically diverse and has defended the external validity of this sample (Berinsky, Huber, and Lenz 2012; Horton, Rand, and Zeckhauser 2011). Partici- pants first filled out questions about food choices (questions about preferences for different-sized orders of French fries and the Dietary Intent Scale [Stice 1998]) and personality (the Hong Psychological Reactance Scale [Hong 1992; Hong and Faedda 1996]). These questions were actually pilot questions for a separate study and thus were unrelated to the present study. Participants were thanked for complet- ing these questions. They were then told that the next part of the study (comparing two competitor websites for “Pure Coffee & Tea,” a new start-up company hoping to sell cof- fee and tea products online) was optional but would be helpful to the founders of the company. Participants were told that providing the website comparison was completely optional to simulate actual opportunities to help companies. Seventy-four participants agreed to provide a website comparison. They were then directed to links to two real competitor websites for coffee and tea retailers. Participants were asked to fill out an online form titled “Pure Coffee & Tea: Review of Competitor Websites” (for screenshots of the online form, see Web Appendix W1). After participants submitted their review of the two competitor websites, they left the online form and returned to the study. Of the 74 par- ticipants who agreed to provide a website comparison, 72 accessed the online form and submitted a review. On average, participants wrote 73.78 words (SD = 58.45; Mdn = 53 words) to answer the four free-response questions in the online form. All participants were then told that the company wanted the researchers to pass on a note to participants who spent time helping them. Participants were then randomly assigned to see a note that either thanked them (verbal acknowledg- ment condition) or thanked them and gave them a $.01 bonus (financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus condition). For the notes, see Appendix A. Note that MTurk allows individ- ual bonuses to be given to participants; thus, the financial benefit was real (and we actually gave participants a bonus of $.25 at the end of the study to help ensure that they would not leave the study feeling unappreciated). As in Study 1a, our dependent variable consisted of three items averaged (Cronbach’s a = .97; see Web Appendix W2) to capture how appreciated participants felt by the company’s actions. Study 1c. Forty-six patrons (56.5% female; Mage = 18.85 years) of a college campus’s dining establishments completed Study 1c in November and December 2014. Par- ticipants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: verbal acknowledgment and financial acknowledgment ($.05 financial benefit). Researchers set up laptop survey stations primarily outside one dining establishment.6 As patrons walked past, researchers asked if they would be willing to complete a customer review of the dining estab- lishment. Because many patrons walked past the survey sta- tions multiple times a day for multiple days, we ensured that each participant only participated once but were unable to assess accurate participation rates. Patrons who agreed to provide a customer review sat at a laptop, where they answered a series of questions and wrote a review of the dining establishment for other potential patrons (for the customer review questions, see Web Appendix W1). On average, participants wrote 46.83 words (SD = 25.74; Mdn = 44 words) for the free-response review. Participants were then told that the dining establish- ment’s parent company would like the researchers to pass on a note to those customers who spent the time helping them by providing a customer review. Participants then received either a verbal acknowledgment or a financial acknowledgment (with $.05 financial benefit). For the notes, see Appendix A. As in Studies 1a and 1b, the dependent variable con- sisted of three items averaged (Cronbach’s a = .98; see Web Appendix W2) to capture how appreciated the company’s actions made the participants feel. Finally, as in Study 1a, participants were debriefed about the purpose of the study and given a piece of chocolate to help ensure that they would not leave the study feeling unappreciated. Results Study 1a. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed that participants who received an acknowledgment with $.05 felt significantly less appreciated than partici- pants who received an acknowledgment without $.05 (M = 4.38 vs. M = 5.57; F(1, 47) = 8.50, p = .005), in support of H1. Consistent with random assignment, length of free- response answers did not differ significantly across acknowledgment conditions (t(47) = .11, p = .914). Study 1b. A one-way ANOVA showed that participants who received a financial acknowledgment with $.01 felt significantly less appreciated than participants who received a verbal acknowledgment (M = 3.91 vs. M = 5.26; F(1, 55) = 10.50, p = .002),7 again demonstrating the trivi- alization effect predicted in H1. This analysis was con- ducted on the 72 participants who provided a website review. Again, the length of free-response answers did not 6One survey session took place outside a different dining estab- lishment also run by the same parent company. Two patrons were surveyed during this survey session. Excluding these two patrons leads to the same results, so we combined the data across dining establishments. 7The standard one-way ANOVA assumes homogeneity of vari- ances. When this assumption is violated (as it is in Studies 1b, 1c, 2b, 3, and 4), we instead report an adjusted F-statistic (and the associated degrees of freedom) provided by the Brown–Forsythe (1974) procedure, which does not assume homogeneity of vari- ances. In addition, in Studies 2a–4, we report p-values from planned comparisons using the t-test for unequal variances, which also does not assume homogeneity of variances (Ruxton 2006), when applicable. Finally, for Study 2b, we report the p-value from a linear weighted contrast using the error term from the groups involved in the linear contrast rather than the pooled error term from the one-way ANOVA. The results do not change for any of these analyses if we conduct analyses that assume homogeneity of variances. Details about these procedures are available upon request. differ significantly across acknowledgment conditions (t(70) = –1.18, p = .243).8 Study 1c. A one-way ANOVA showed that participants who received an acknowledgment with $.05 felt signifi- cantly less appreciated than participants who received an acknowledgment without $.05 (M = 3.39 vs. M = 4.86; F(1, 39) = 11.97, p = .001). The length of free-response answers was marginally significantly different across acknowledg- ment conditions (t(44) = 1.82, p = .075), but importantly, the effect of acknowledgment condition remained signifi- cant (p = .002) when we used length of free-response answers as a covariate. Discussion Studies 1a–1c provide support for our hypothesis that express- ing customer appreciation using a financial acknowledg- ment (i.e., a firm-to-consumer message that includes mone- tary benefit) can lead consumers to feel less appreciated than a verbal acknowledgment (i.e., a similar message with no monetary benefit; H1). This finding held across contexts and means of controlling for message content. The robust- ness of these findings highlights the importance of recog- nizing and understanding the trivialization effect.9 Our next set of studies replicates these findings while exploring the mechanism that drives this effect. Studies 2a and 2b: Varying Adherence to Verbal Norms and Financial Expectations Studies 2a and 2b examine the importance of two types of standards (verbal gratitude norms and financial benefit expectations) in leading to the trivialization effect (H2). Collectively, these two studies test our theory that people evaluate verbal acknowledgments relative to verbal norms, whereas they evaluate acknowledgments with financial benefits relative to both verbal norms and financial benefit expectations. Study 2a: Varying Adherence to Verbal Gratitude Expression Norms Study 2a examines a smaller-than-expected financial bene- fit and varies the extent to which the acknowledgment’s message content adheres to verbal norms. We predict that the trivialization effect will be mitigated when the verbal message content fails to conform to verbal norms (H2a). Method Design. One hundred sixty-one participants (47.2% female; Mage = 33.30 years) from MTurk completed this study. Participants were randomly assigned to one of four between-subjects conditions in a 2 (acknowledgment type: verbal acknowledgment, financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus) ¥ 2 (message content: adherent to verbal norms, nonadherent to verbal norms) design. Procedure. The procedure in Study 2a is similar to that used in Study 1b. Four hundred thirty-four participants (44.0% female; Mage = 32.47 years) from MTurk were recruited to participate in a study ostensibly about partici- pants and their attitudes toward various decisions. Partici- pants first filled out two personality scales, the Big Five Inventory (John, Donahue, and Kentle 1991) and the Need for Cognition Scale (Cacioppo and Petty 1982), which were unrelated to the present study. Participants were thanked for completing these scales. Participants were then told that the next task (providing a website review for a university) was optional but would be helpful to the website feedback team. Of the 434 recruited participants, 161 agreed to provide a website review. These participants were then directed to links for the actual website of a top business school in the United States. Participants were asked to look at the website and then to fill out an online form titled “[Business School]: Review of Website” (for screenshots of the online form, see Web Appendix W1). After participants submitted their review, they left the online form and returned to the study. On average, participants wrote 53.06 words (SD = 34.12; Mdn = 46 words) to answer the three free-response ques- tions in the online form. Participants were then told that the university’s website feedback team wanted the researchers to pass on a note to participants who spent time helping them. Participants then saw one of the following notes, depending on which condi- tion they were randomly assigned to: verbal acknowledg- ment adherent to verbal norms, verbal acknowledgment nonadherent to verbal norms, financial acknowledgment adherent to verbal norms (with a $.01 bonus), or financial acknowledgment nonadherent to verbal norms (with a $.01 bonus). For the notes, see Appendix A. Note that although there are many ways that a firm’s message could be nonadherent to verbal norms, we varied one important aspect of verbal norms—the extent to which the acknowledgment was offered out of a sense of obliga- tion—because prior research has indicated that an acknowl- edgment does not adhere to prototypical gratitude expres- sions if it is offered out of a sense of obligation (Lambert, Graham, and Fincham 2009). Varying this one aspect enabled us to change the adherence of the note to verbal norms while retaining a high level of similarity on other message components. In addition, as in Study 1b, at the end of the study, we gave $.25 actual bonuses to all participants. Dependent variable. The dependent variable consisted of three items averaged to capture how appreciated partici- pants felt (Cronbach’s a = .98; see Web Appendix W2). 80 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 8Word count was skewed to the right, so we performed the t-test on log-transformed word count. 9We also note additional studies we conducted regarding the robustness of the trivialization effect, but we do not include those in this article. Namely, we find that the trivialization effect holds in the context of employee bonus compensation, using common gifts rather than monetary payments, and as expressions of apol- ogy for service failure rather than appreciation for patronage or other inputs provided by the customer. Herein, we focus on the context of consumers and expressions of appreciation. Should Firms Use Small Financial Benefits? / 81 Manipulation check (financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus conditions). In the two financial acknowledg- ment conditions, participants were asked, “Does the MTurk bonus provided by the [Business School’s] management team fail to meet, meet, or exceed your expectations for how much of an MTurk bonus the university would pro- vide?” (1 = “fails to meet my expectations,” 4 = “meets my expectations,” and 7 = “exceeds my expectations”). This measure allowed us to confirm that the $.01 MTurk bonus met (or, in this case, failed to meet) financial benefit expec- tations similarly, regardless of whether the message content adhered to prototypical gratitude expressions. Manipulation check (verbal acknowledgment condi- tions). In the two verbal acknowledgment conditions, par- ticipants were asked two questions to gauge the extent to which they thought that the message content adhered to ver- bal norms. We developed these two questions (see Web Appendix W3) based on the prototypical gratitude expres- sions described in Lambert, Graham, and Fincham (2009). We averaged responses to these two questions to form an adherence to verbal norms index (r = .795, p < 001), which allowed us to confirm differences in perceived adherence. Confound checks. Finally, we asked questions about perceived correctness of spelling (“Does this note have cor- rect spelling?” 1 = “not at all,” and 7 = “very much so”), length (“How long is this message?” 1 = “very short,” and 7 = “very long”), and understandability (“How easy is it to understand this note?” 1 = “very difficult to understand,” and 7 = “very easy to understand”). These responses helped us ensure that our manipulation aimed at altering adherence to verbal norms did not affect these aspects of the notes. Results Manipulation checks, confound checks, and website review length. Before analyzing the main dependent variable, we conducted analyses of manipulation and con- found checks, which indicated that our manipulations were successful and did not create problematic confounds. First, a manipulation check of the two financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus conditions confirmed that the $.01 bonus met financial benefit expectations similarly regardless of whether the message content adhered to verbal norms (Madherent, $.01 bonus = 2.88 vs. Mnonadherent, $.01 bonus = 2.45; t(78) = 1.10, p = .274). Importantly, the financial benefit did not meet financial benefit expectations: responses were less than the midpoint of the scale (4), according to one-sample t-tests (ps < .001). Second, a manipulation check of the two verbal acknowledgment conditions confirmed that adherence to verbal norms was indeed higher when the message content was intended to adhere to these norms (Madherent, no bonus = 5.55 vs. Mnonadherent, no bonus = 2.71; t(67) = 9.58, p < .001). Furthermore, according to one-sample t-tests, ratings of the adherent note were greater than the scale midpoint (4) (p < .001), whereas ratings of the nonadherent note were less than the scale midpoint (p < .001). Third, there were no two-way interactions between acknowledgment type and message content on any of the three confound checks (spelling: p = .417; length: p = .649; understandability: p = .174), so we collapsed them across acknowledgment type and confirmed that none of the con- found checks differed across the message content manipula- tion (spelling: p = .134; length: p = .490; understandability: p = .430). Finally, consistent with random assignment, the website review length did not differ significantly across conditions (F(3, 157) = .86, p = .466). Dependent variable. Consistent with H2a, a two-way ANOVA conducted on the 161 participants who submitted a website review revealed a marginally significant two-way interaction between acknowledgment type and the message content’s adherence to verbal norms (F(1, 157) = 3.79, p = .053). See Figure 1. When the message content adhered to verbal norms, we again replicated our key trivialization effect from the prior studies (Madherent, no bonus = 5.48 vs. Madherent, $.01 bonus = 3.91; t(65) = 4.88, p < .001), as we predicted in H1. Importantly, when the message content did not adhere to verbal norms, the trivialization effect was no longer present (Mnonadherent, no bonus = 3.33 vs. Mnonadherent, $.01 bonus = 2.85; t(78) = 1.05, p = .296), as predicted in H2a. In further support of our theory that verbal acknowledg- ments are evaluated entirely on the basis of adherence to ver- bal norms whereas financial acknowledgments are evaluated only partly on the basis of adherence to verbal norms, the impact of varying adherence to verbal norms was greater in the verbal acknowledgments condition. For verbal acknowl- edgments, participants reported that they would feel much FIGURE 1 Study 2a: Trivialization Effect as a Function of Whether Message Content Adheres to Verbal Norms 5.48 3.33 3.91 2.85 Message Adherent to Verbal Gratitude Expression Norms Message Nonadherent to Verbal Gratitude Expression Norms 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Fe eli ng s of B ein g Ap pr ec iat ed (1 = “N ot a t A ll,” 7 = “V er y Mu ch ”) Verbal acknowledgment Financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus Notes: The trivialization effect occurs when the message content adheres to verbal gratitude expression norms (H1) but is mitigated when the message content does not adhere to ver- bal gratitude expression norms (H2a). The error bars refer to standard errors of the mean. more appreciated when the message content adhered to ver- bal norms (Madherent, no bonus = 5.48 vs. Mnonadherent, no bonus = 3.33; t(57) = 5.64, p < .001). For financial acknowledg- ments, participants also reported that they would feel more appreciated when the message content adhered to verbal norms (Madherent, $.01 bonus = 3.91 vs. Mnonadherent, $.01 bonus = 2.85; t(78) = 2.57, p = .012), but importantly, consistent with our theory, the interaction suggests that the magnitude of the difference was smaller, signifying that financial acknowledgments are based partly, but not entirely, on adherence to verbal norms. Discussion Study 2a varied the extent to which an acknowledgment’s message content adhered to verbal norms. As we predicted, the trivialization effect did not emerge when the message content did not adhere to verbal norms. Furthermore, evaluations of the financial acknowledgment were affected by the message content’s adherence to verbal norms, but not to the extent that evaluations of the verbal acknowledgment were. This latter result provides further support for our theory that when the acknowledgment is verbal, consumers base their evaluation of the acknowledgment entirely on the message content’s adherence to verbal norms, whereas when the acknowledgment is financial, consumers base their evaluation of the acknowledgment only partly on the message content’s adherence to verbal norms. Although we contend that these findings are important for demonstrating our theory, given that firms are unlikely to send apprecia- tive notes to their customers that fail to adhere to verbal norms, we return to a focus on acknowledgments that meet verbal norms in the remaining studies, consistent with Stud- ies 1a–1c. Study 2b: Varying Adherence to Financial Benefit Expectations Study 2b tests our theory that consumers who receive an acknowledgment with a financial benefit base part of their evaluation of the acknowledgment on the amount of the financial benefit. We do so by focusing on acknowledg- ments whose message content is adherent to verbal norms and by manipulating the relationship of a financial benefit amount to expectations such that amounts fall short, meet, or exceed expectations. In line with our theory, we should replicate the trivialization effect observed in Studies 1a–1c and 2a when the financial benefit amount falls short of expectations, but amounts that meet and exceed expecta- tions should not lead to trivialization (H2b). Method Design. Three hundred sixty-four participants (37.9% female; Mage = 31.12 years) from MTurk completed this study. Participants were randomly assigned to one of nine conditions: 0% discount (verbal acknowledgment), 5% dis- count, 10% discount, 15% discount, 20% discount, 25% discount, 30% discount, 35% discount, and 40% discount. Pretest. We selected these discount amounts on the basis of a separate pretest in which 46 participants from MTurk saw the same scenario as participants in the main study’s acknowledgment with 0% discount condition. In this separate pretest, participants were asked what percent- age discount off their next purchase they would expect to receive to thank them for their loyalty. These pretest results indicated that a 5% discount would meet or exceed expecta- tions for 0% of participants, a 10% discount would for 28.3% of participants, a 15% discount would for 41.3% of participants, a 20% discount would for 67.4% of partici- pants, a 25% discount would for 78.3% of participants, a 30% discount would for 87.0% of participants, a 35% dis- count would for 91.3% of participants, and a 40% discount would for 95.7% of participants. Therefore, by manipulat- ing the financial benefit at these amounts, we are able to increase the degree to which the financial benefit meets or exceeds participants’ expectations. Procedure. Participants first read the following direc- tions: “Imagine that you frequently go shopping at a mid- end clothing store at the mall and bring the store a lot of business by encouraging other people to shop there as well. You even wrote a lengthy review of this store on their social media page. In short, you do a lot to benefit this store’s business. Imagine that you get the following email.” Participants then saw an e-mail that was manipulated in line with the randomly assigned conditions to either thank the customer (verbal acknowledgment) or thank the cus- tomer and offer a discount on her next purchase (the size of the discount varied from 5% to 40%, depending on the financial acknowledgment condition). For the e-mails, see Appendix A. Dependent variable. Finally, participants were asked how appreciated they felt (“After receiving this e-mail, how appreciated would you feel by the store for all that you do for its business?” 1 = “not at all appreciated,” and 7 = “very much appreciated”). Results A one-way ANOVA using discount amount to predict appreciation was significant (F(8, 320) = 6.18, p < .001). See Figure 2. We then conducted planned contrasts to test our theory regarding the importance of financial benefit expectations in creating trivialization (H2b). Consistent with H2b, the only decrease in appreciation occurred when shifting from the 0% discount condition to the 5% discount condition (M = 5.19 vs. M = 4.49; t(77) = 1.98, p = .051). Aside from the 0% discount condition, the 15%–40% discount conditions also generated significantly greater appreciation than did the 5% discount condition (ps ranging from .005 to <.001), in support of H2b. In addition, when examining the eight nonzero discount conditions (the 5%–40% discount conditions), we observed a consistent positive linear trend in feelings of appreciation as the dis- count amounts met or exceeded expectations (significant weighted linear contrast: F(1, 314) = 41.83, p < .001), indi- cating that larger discounts were associated with feeling more appreciated than were smaller discounts. Finally, the 82 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 Should Firms Use Small Financial Benefits? / 83 30%–40% discount conditions, which met or exceeded expectations for most pretest participants, were all signifi- cantly higher than the 0% discount condition (ps from .019 to .001). Discussion Study 2b demonstrated that financial benefit amounts that fail to meet consumers’ expectations lead to the trivializa- tion effect but amounts that meet or exceed expectations do not. This finding suggests that consumers compare their received financial benefit amount with their financial bene- fit expectations as a reference point. Importantly, this find- ing shows that it is not simple proximity to financial benefit expectations that determines consumers’ satisfaction, because a small amount is objectively closer to financial benefit expectations than is zero. Rather, considerable satis- faction created by a verbal acknowledgment (no financial benefit included) suggests that it is evaluated relative to a different standard than a financial acknowledgment (finan- cial benefit included). As we demonstrated in Study 2a, this standard is likely to be the extent to which the acknowledg- ment’s message content adheres to verbal norms. Study 3: Marketer-Provided Financial Benefit Reference Point Study 2b’s findings suggest that consumers may automati- cally use their own financial benchmarks when financial benefits are presented. Accordingly, we suggest that mar- keters should be able to provide alternative reference points to shift consumers’ reference points away from their own internal financial benefit expectations. Therefore, Study 3 tests whether the trivialization effect will be mitigated when consumers are exposed to lower firm-provided financial benefit reference points, consistent with H3. In addition to further testing the role of financial benefit reference points in evaluating financial acknowledgments, Study 3 is also important from a managerial perspective because it can suggest a practical way for managers to salvage the power of small financial benefits without increasing the firm’s costs. Method Design. Two hundred fifty-one participants (37.1% female; Mage = 30.14 years) from MTurk completed this study. Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: verbal acknowledgment, financial acknowledg- ment (5% discount), or financial acknowledgment (5% dis- count) with lower reference points. Procedure. Participants first read the following direc- tions, which were similar to those read by participants in Study 2b: “Imagine that you frequently go shopping at a mid-level clothing store at the mall and bring the store a lot of business by encouraging other people to shop there as well. You also wrote a lengthy review of this store on their social media page. Imagine that you get the following note.” Depending on randomly assigned condition, partici- pants then saw a note that either thanked them (verbal acknowledgment condition) or thanked them and offered a 5% discount on their next purchase (financial acknowledg- ment condition; financial acknowledgment with lower ref- erence points condition). In the financial acknowledgment with lower reference points condition, a series of potential discounts were listed on the note (1%, 2%, 3%, 4%, and 5%), and the 5% discount amount was circled. For the notes, see Appendix B. Dependent variable. The dependent variable consisted of three items averaged to capture how appreciated partici- pants felt (Cronbach’s a = .95; see Web Appendix W2). Results A one-way ANOVA using condition to predict felt appreci- ation was significant (F(2, 238) = 7.53, p = .001) (see Fig- ure 3). We then conducted planned comparisons to test whether we would replicate the trivialization effect pre- dicted in H1 and to test H3 (that the trivialization effect can be mitigated by providing alternative financial benefit refer- ence points). First, in support of H1, participants who received the financial acknowledgment felt less appreciated than partici- pants who received the verbal acknowledgment (M = 4.25 vs. M = 5.08; t(155) = 3.46, p = .001). Second, in support of H3, participants who received the financial acknowledg- ment with lower reference points felt similarly appreciated as participants who received the verbal acknowledgment (M = 5.04 vs. M = 5.08; t(160) = .17, p = .864) and felt more appreciated than participants who received the financial acknowledgment without the lower reference points (M = 5.04 vs. M = 4.25; t(168) = 3.06, p = .003). FIGURE 2 Study 2b: Effect of Different Financial Benefit Amounts on Consumers’ Felt Appreciation 5.19 4.49 5.03 5.57 5.48 5.52 5.85 5.90 6.22 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40%0% 5% 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Fe eli ng s of B ein g Ap pr ec iat ed (1 = “N ot a t A ll,” 7 = “V er y Mu ch ”) Condition Notes: The trivialization effect occurs when the financial benefit pro- vided is smaller than expected (i.e., 5% discount; H1) but is mitigated and reversed when the financial benefit provided meets or exceeds expectations (i.e., 10%–40% discount; H2b). The error bars refer to standard errors of the mean. Discussion Study 3 replicates the trivialization effect (H1) and further shows that it is eliminated when consumers are exposed to lower financial benefit reference points (H3). Thus, Study 3 provides further support for the importance of financial benefit reference points when evaluating financial acknowl- edgments. Moreover, from a practical perspective, Study 3 is important because it suggests that managers may be able to avoid the trivialization effect by presenting consumers with explicit financial benefit reference points that are lower than the small benefit amounts offered. Study 4: Prosocial Benefit As Study 3 suggests, lower reference points provided by managers can effectively alter reference points for evaluat- ing financial benefits. However, we also suggest that other mechanisms may similarly change these reference points. As such, Study 4 tests a form of financial benefit that we suggest may be less subject to comparison with a higher financial benefit expectations reference point: prosocial benefit. Specifically, Study 4 tests whether the trivialization effect will be mitigated when the financial benefit is proso- cial, consistent with H3. To maximize ecological validity, participants in this study completed a review for a proposed start-up company and actually received the financial benefit assigned by condition. Method Design. Two hundred thirty-eight participants (60.9% female; Mage = 38.56 years) from MTurk completed this study. Participants were randomly assigned to one of four conditions: verbal acknowledgment (no bonus), financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus (version 1), financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus (version 2), and financial acknowledgment with $.01 prosocial bonus. We created two versions of the financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus to further establish the robustness of the trivialization effect to a change in wording that emphasized that the com- pany knew that the small bonus could not begin to compen- sate participants for the time they spent (version 2). Procedure. Seven hundred sixty-one participants (51.6% female; Mage = 35.29 years) from MTurk were recruited to participate in a study ostensibly about participants and their attitudes toward various decisions. As in Study 2a, partici- pants first filled out two personality scales, the Big Five Inventory (John, Donahue, and Kentle 1991) and the Need for Cognition Scale (Cacioppo and Petty 1982), which were unrelated to the present study. Participants were thanked for completing these scales. They were then told that the next task (providing a website review for “Fifth & Falls,” a start- up company hoping to sell modern tableware online) was optional but would be helpful to the company’s founders. To mimic actual opportunities to provide input to compa- nies, we told participants that providing the website review was completely optional. Of the 761 recruited participants, 248 agreed to provide a website review. These participants were directed to a separate website for this modern tableware company. Par- ticipants were asked to look at the website and, when ready to write the review, to click on the “Reviews” tab of the website and fill out a review (for a screenshot of the home page and the reviews page of this website, see Web Appen- dix W1). Of the 248 participants who agreed to provide a website review, 238 actually submitted a review. After these participants submitted their reviews, they left the website and returned to the study. The average length of a submitted review was 43.04 words (SD = 33.92; Mdn = 34 words). Participants were then randomly assigned to one of the four conditions. They were told that the company wanted the researchers to pass on a note to participants who spent time helping them. Participants then saw a note that thanked them (verbal acknowledgment condition), thanked them and gave them a $.01 bonus (financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus, version 1 condition), thanked them and gave them a $.01 bonus that the company acknowledged could not begin to compensate them for the time they had spent (financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus, version 2 condition), or thanked them and told them that $.01 would be given to a charity on their behalf (financial acknowledgment with $.01 prosocial bonus condition). As in Studies 1b and 2a, we actu- ally gave participants in the nonprosocial financial acknowl- edgment conditions a bonus of $.25 at the end of the study to help ensure that they would not leave feeling unappreci- ated, and we donated $.25 to charity for each participant in the prosocial bonus condition. For the notes, see Appendix A. Dependent variable. The dependent variable consisted of three items averaged to capture how appreciated partici- pants felt (Cronbach’s a = .95; see Web Appendix W2). 84 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 FIGURE 3 Study 3: Effect of Lower Financial Reference Points on Trivialization Effect 5.08 4.25 5.04 Verbal Acknowledgment Financial Acknowledgment (5% Discount) with Lower Reference Points Financial Acknowledgment (5% Discount) 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Fe eli ng s of B ein g Ap pr ec iat ed (1 = “N ot a t A ll,” 7 = “V er y Mu ch ”) Notes: The trivialization effect is mitigated through the firm providing lower reference points (H3). The error bars refer to standard errors of the mean. Should Firms Use Small Financial Benefits? / 85 Results A one-way ANOVA on the 238 participants who provided a website review, using acknowledgment condition to predict felt appreciation, was significant (F(3, 222) = 3.78, p = .011). See Figure 4. We then conducted planned compari- sons to test for the trivialization effect (H1) and to test whether making the financial benefit prosocial mitigates the trivialization effect (H3). First, consistent with H1, participants who received a financial acknowledgment with a $.01 bonus felt signifi- cantly less appreciated than participants who received a ver- bal acknowledgment (version 1: M = 4.65 vs. M = 5.48; t(105) = 3.05, p = .003; version 2: M = 4.67 vs. M = 5.48; t(106) = 2.94, p = .004). Second, consistent with H3, partici- pants who received a financial acknowledgment with a $.01 prosocial bonus felt similarly appreciated as participants who received a verbal acknowledgment (M = 5.14 vs. M = 5.48; t(111) = 1.26, p = .211). Participants who received a $.01 prosocial bonus also felt directionally more appreci- ated than participants who received a $.01 traditional bonus (version 1: t(117) = –1.61, p = .110; version 2: t(118) = –1.53, p = .129). Note that consistent with random assignment, the website review length did not differ significantly across conditions (F(3, 234) = .93, p = .429) and therefore cannot account for any of these findings. Discussion Study 4 replicates the trivialization effect (H1) and further shows that the trivialization effect is eliminated when the financial benefit is prosocial (H3). From a practical perspec- tive, Study 4 is important because it suggests that managers may be able to avoid the trivialization effect by directing small financial benefits toward charity rather than toward customers. Study 4 also suggests that it is not sufficient for the firm to acknowledge that the financial benefit provided in the financial acknowledgment is too small, as this strat- egy failed to mitigate the trivialization effect. General Discussion Across seven studies, we demonstrate that receiving an acknowledgment with a smaller-than-expected financial benefit can lead consumers to feel less appreciated than receiving no financial benefit. We refer to this finding as the “trivialization effect” and to such smaller-than-expected financial benefits as “trivializing compensation”—a novel and useful construct for both managerial practice and theory. We examined the size of the trivialization effect by conducting a meta-analysis of 615 participants across the seven studies in this article.10 The weighted average effect size (using Cohen’s d) was .69, which represents a medium- plus effect size according to Cohen (1992). As such, the trivialization effect is clearly substantial. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this effect occurs because offering a financial acknowledgment leads con- sumers to evaluate the firm’s response in part according to a different standard—whether it meets their financial benefit expectations—rather than solely according to whether the message content meets verbal norms associated with proto- typical gratitude expressions (Studies 2a and 2b). Accord- ingly, when the content of a message adheres to norms of verbal gratitude expressions (Lambert, Graham, and Fin- cham 2009), including a smaller-than-expected financial benefit backfires. However, when the content of the mes- sage violates norms of verbal gratitude expressions (Study 2a) or when financial benefits meet or exceed expectations (Study 2b), the trivialization effect dissipates. Given the importance of financial benefit reference points in contributing to the trivialization effect, we demon- strate that the effect can be eliminated when consumers are exposed to financial benefit reference points that are lower than the financial benefit provided by the firm (Study 3). In addition, we demonstrate that the trivialization effect can also be eliminated when the financial benefit is offered in a prosocial form, which may be less susceptible to compari- sons with high financial benefit expectations (Study 4). Managerial Implications Communicating appreciation to one’s customers is crucial, particularly within the context of an ongoing relationship FIGURE 4 Study 4: Effect of Prosocial Benefit on Trivialization Effect 5.48 4.65 4.67 5.14 Verbal Acknowledg- ment Financial Acknowledg- ment with $.01 Bonus (Version 1) Financial Acknowledg- ment with $.01 Bonus (Version 2) Financial Acknowledg- ment with $.01 Prosocial Bonus 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Fe eli ng s of B ein g Ap pr ec iat ed (1 = “N ot a t A ll,” 7 = “V er y Mu ch ”) Notes: The trivialization effect is mitigated by the firm providing the financial benefit in a prosocial form (H3). The error bars refer to standard errors of the mean. 10We included a verbal acknowledgment condition and a finan- cial acknowledgment with a small financial benefit condition from each study for the meta-analysis. Specifically, we included the fol- lowing conditions: both conditions from each of Studies 1a–1c, the adherent no bonus condition and the adherent bonus condition from Study 2a, the 0% discount condition and the 5% discount condition from Study 2b, the verbal acknowledgment condition and the financial acknowledgment with 5% discount condition from Study 3, and the verbal acknowledgment condition and the financial acknowledgment with $.01 bonus (version 1) condition from Study 4. Additional details are available upon request. between the customer and the firm. Given our findings, what guidance can we offer to a manager aiming to acknowledge customers effectively? Our research suggests four consider- ations for managers as they plan their course of action. First, it is important that managers do not underestimate the value of a simple verbal acknowledgment that adheres to verbal norms (Lambert, Graham, and Fincham 2009). As our studies show, a verbal acknowledgment can be better than a similarly worded financial acknowledgment so long as the message content meets verbal gratitude expression norms and the financial benefit is smaller than expected. Second, managers should conduct market research to understand people’s expectations of appropriate financial benefit levels. Study 2b shows that, ideally, amounts that exceed the expected financial benefit should be used so that managers can reverse the trivialization effect. Indeed, Study 2b’s findings do not support an alternative account that people simply react more negatively to financial acknowl- edgments than to verbal acknowledgments. Rather, offering a financial acknowledgment can be a beneficial way to acknowledge loyal customers for their support, provided customers’ financial benefit expectations are met. Third, when expectations are high, unstable, or difficult to measure, a firm that aims to offer small financial benefits should craft communications that prompt consumers to con- sider lower reference points. For example, as Study 3 shows, communications may list a range of possible benefit amounts such that the highest benefit amount corresponds to the amount the firm offers. If firms use this strategy, they should manage the distribution of benefit amounts such that most consumers will be given a reference point lower than the amount they actually receive. Our research suggests that this strategy may help consumers feel appreciated and value the small financial benefits provided by firms. Fourth, as Study 4 shows, a firm that wants to offer small financial benefits should consider offering consumers the opportunity to direct the financial benefit to a prosocial endeavor. Our findings suggest that a prosocial-oriented approach can salvage small firm expenditures and effectively communicate the firm’s appreciation. Furthermore, prior research has suggested additional benefits to a firm for engag- ing in prosocial behaviors (Varadarajan and Menon 1988). Notably, both recent managerial advice pieces (Corstjens and Lal 2014; Young Entrepreneur Council 2014) and recent managerial actions at some companies suggest that many managers continue to struggle with how best to acknowledge loyal consumers (Co 2012; Lyon 2012; skh 2013). Although managers are likely to think that violating verbal norms in their acknowledgment messages would not make sense, they might not think about the likelihood that adding financial benefits would trivialize their customers’ efforts. Indeed, in an additional study (available upon request), we find that laypeople actually anticipate the opposite of the trivialization effect—that is, when asked whether they would feel more appreciated with a verbal acknowledgment or a financial acknowledgment with a small financial benefit (i.e., in a joint or comparative evaluation mode in which each person views both types of acknowledgments, which may be the predominant evalua- tion mode managers face; Hsee 1996; Hsee et al. 1999; Tan- ner 2008; Weaver, Garcia, and Schwarz 2012), they thought that they would feel more appreciated if they received a financial acknowledgment. As in many other areas of con- sumer research, people may not always have the correct lay intuitions about how managers can acknowledge consumers without trivializing their efforts. Theoretical Contributions and Future Directions The present research offers the important theoretical contri- bution that a firm’s method of acknowledging consumers can alter the evaluation standards that consumers use to judge the firm’s action. Specifically, making an acknowledg- ment financial rather than verbal by including a financial benefit shifts consumers from evaluating the acknowledg- ment on the basis of adherence to verbal norms alone. Instead, consumers also focus on whether the financial benefit amount meets their expectations and average this evaluation with their evaluation of the acknowledgment’s adherence to verbal norms (Anderson 1965; Gaeth et al. 1990; Weaver, Garcia, and Schwarz 2012; Yadav 1994). Note that in this research, we assume a simple averaging model, which is consistent with much prior research on evaluation of multi- component stimuli (Anderson 1965; Gaeth et al. 1990; Weaver, Garcia, and Schwarz 2012; Yadav 1994). However, further research might examine whether a simple averaging model or a weighted averaging model (the latter of which can be used to model an anchoring and adjustment process; Einhorn and Hogarth 1985; Hogarth and Einhorn 1992; Johnson and Puto 1987; Yadav 1994) better captures the evaluation of financial acknowledgments. In showing the trivialization effect, we also believe that our work prompts careful consideration about the general application of the expectancy disconfirmation paradigm: although a financial acknowledgment is objectively closer to financial benefit expectations than a verbal acknowledg- ment, the inclusion of the small financial benefit can lead consumers to feel less appreciated. Thus, it is not always the case that satisfaction will increase as financial benefits become closer to quantitative expectations. To increase sat- isfaction as financial benefits approach quantitative expec- tations, managers must be confident that no other possible standard (e.g., verbal expression norms) was cued in the absence of the financial benefit. Drawing on the importance of financial benefit refer- ence points in contributing to the trivialization effect, this article also illustrates two strategies to eliminate the trivial- ization effect. We theorize that the trivialization effect may be eliminated when a prosocial benefit is offered because the utility provided by giving a prosocial benefit is fairly insensitive to the quantity of benefit actually provided (Hsee and Rottenstreich 2004; Imas 2014; Small, Loewen- stein, and Slovic 2007) or because a prosocial benefit is more likely to be evaluated according to low financial refer- ence points (Cialdini and Schroeder 1976; Estrin 2013). In addition, consumers are likely conditioned to think of the cumulative effects of small amounts of money directed toward prosocial causes. Further research could aim to dis- entangle these possibilities. 86 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 Should Firms Use Small Financial Benefits? / 87 In the present research, we varied either adherence to verbal norms (holding financial benefit constant at a smaller-than-expected level; Study 2a) or adherence to financial benefit expectations (holding message content adherent to verbal norms; Study 2b). However, further research could jointly vary these two factors through an extension of our proposed multicomponent averaging model. It would be particularly worthwhile for future stud- ies to examine what happens when the message does not adhere to verbal norms but the financial benefit is larger than expected: Can a large enough financial benefit over- come a lack of adherence to verbal norms? Scholars could examine these and other possibilities through the lens intro- duced herein. In addition, we also note that there are many ways that a message may fail to adhere to verbal norms that we do not examine here (e.g., length, personalization) but that might be explored in further research. Finally, we focused on felt appreciation as a key depen- dent variable throughout our studies. The types of acknowl- edgments that we examined across our studies are those that firms commonly use as part of customer appreciation or loyalty programs designed specifically to communicate firms’ appreciation for their customers (Valenzuela, Mulki, and Jaramillo 2010). Accordingly, appreciation is the most immediate outcome that the focal messages would be expected to produce. In focusing on felt appreciation, we shed light on factors that shape felt appreciation within marketing channel relationships. Given the strong theoretical and empirical associations between felt appreciation, well- being, satisfaction, and various indicators of relationship commitment (Geyskens, Steenkamp, and Kumar 1999; Hoffman and Lowitt 2008; Reis et al. 2000), a better under- standing of how firms’ actions affect felt appreciation is important for marketers interested in building stronger rela- tionships with their customers. Appendix A: Main Stimuli for All Studies Study 1a: Hotel Field Study Dear Sir or Madam, Thank you very much for your time and support in pro- viding this feedback for our company. We really appreciate it, and your feedback will be help- ful to us. We [verbal acknowledgment condition: “wanted to send you this note”; financial acknowledgment ($.05) condition: “will give you $0.05 (a nickel) at the end of this study”] to thank you for all the time you spent. Sincerely, [Hotel Conference Center’s] Management Study 1b: Competitor Feedback Study Dear Sir or Madam, Thank you very much for your valuable time and support in providing this review of our competitors’ websites! We know that you may have spent quite a bit of time doing this. We are sending you [verbal acknowledgment condition: “this brief note”; financial acknowledgment ($.01) condi- tion: “a $0.01 additional mTurk payment”] to tell you how much we value your time and support. Sincerely, Pure Coffee & Tea Founders Study 1c: Dining Establishment Study Dear customer, Thank you very much for your time and support in pro- viding this feedback for [Dining Establishment]. We really appreciate it, and your feedback will be very helpful to us. We wanted to send you this note to thank you for all the time you spent. [verbal acknowledgment condition: N.A.; financial acknowledgment ($.05) condition: “We will also give you $0.05 (a nickel) to thank you for your time.”] Sincerely, [Dining Establishment Parent Company] Study 2a: Varying Adherence to Verbal Gratitude Expression Norms Adherent to Verbal Gratitude Expressions Conditions Dear worker, The management team at [Business School] would like to thank you for looking at our website and providing your feedback on how we can improve! We truly value all that you have done to support us, so we wanted to send you [verbal acknowledgment condition: “this note”; financial acknowledgment ($.01) condition: “a $0.01 mTurk bonus”] to tell you how much we value and appreciate your help. Sincerely, [Business School’s] Management Team Nonadherent to Verbal Gratitude Expressions Conditions Dear worker, The management team at [Business School] is required to send this automatically-generated message to all indi- viduals who complete the website review task: Thank you for taking the time to look at our website and for providing your feedback. We are sending you [verbal acknowledgment condition: “this note”; financial acknowl- edgment ($.01) condition: “a $0.01 mTurk bonus”] today mainly because it is mandatory for us to offer recognition. Sincerely, [Business School’s] Management Team Study 2b: Varying Adherence to Financial Benefit Expectations Dear customer, Thank you very much for your loyalty to our store through your frequent purchases and your positive word-of- mouth to other customers. We truly value all that you do to support our business, so we wanted to send you [0% dis- count (verbal acknowledgment) condition: “this note”; 5%– 40% discount (financial acknowledgment) conditions: “this coupon for 5-40 percent off your next purchase”] to tell you how much we value and appreciate your support. Sincerely, [Store] Study 4: Prosocial Benefit Dear Sir or Madam, Thank you very much for your valuable time and sup- port in providing this review of our website! We know that you may have spent quite a bit of time doing this. We are sending [verbal acknowledgment condition: “you this brief note”; financial acknowledgment with $.01 (version 1) condition: “you a $0.01 additional mTurk pay- ment”; financial acknowledgment with $.01 (version 2) condition: “you a $0.01 additional mTurk payment”; finan- cial acknowledgment with $.01 prosocial condition: “a $0.01 donation to Feeding America (a hunger-relief charity) on your behalf”] to tell you how much we value your time and support. [financial acknowledgment with $.01 (version 2) condition: “(We truly appreciate your help and realize that this small payment cannot begin to compensate you for all of the time you spent providing a review.)”] Sincerely, A. Williams Fifth & Falls Store Manager 88 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 a Penny Helps,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34 (4), 599–604. Co, Alex (2012), “Microsoft Sending Out 20 MS Points (25 Cents) as Birthday Gifts to Xbox LIVE Users,” Gameranx.com, (October 5), (accessed March 4, 2015), [available at http:// www. gameranx.com/updates/id/9837/article/microsoft-sending- out-20-ms-points-25-cents-as-birthday-gifts-to-xbox-live-users/]. Cohen, Jacob (1992), “A Power Primer,” Psychological Bulletin, 112 (1), 155–59. Corstjens, Marcel and Raji Lal (2014), “Six Myths About Cus- tomer Loyalty Programs,” Forbes, (February 24), (accessed March 4, 2015), [available at http://www.forbes.com/sites/ hbsworkingknowledge/2014/02/24/six-myths-about-customer- loyalty-programs/]. Dunn, Elizabeth W., Lara B. Aknin, and Michael I. Norton (2008), “Spending Money on Others Promotes Happiness,” Science, 319 (5870), 1687–88. Einhorn, Hillel J. and Robin M. Hogarth (1985), “Ambiguity and Uncertainty in Probabilistic Inference,” Psychological Review, 92 (4), 433–61. Epley, Nicholas and Thomas Gilovich (2010), “Anchoring Unbound,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 20 (1), 20–24. Estrin, Michael (2013), “Is the US Getting Rid of the Penny?” Bankrate.com, (July 31), (accessed March 4, 2015), [available at: http://www.bankrate.com/finance/economics/getting-rid-of- the-penny.aspx]. Gaeth, Gary J., Irwin P. Levin, Goutam Chakraborty, and Aron M. Levin (1990), “Consumer Evaluation of Multi-Product Bun- dles: An Information Integration Analysis,” Marketing Letters, 2 (1), 47–57. Geyskens, Inge, Jan-Benedict E.M. Steenkamp, and Nirmalya Kumar (1999), “A Meta-Analysis of Satisfaction in Marketing Channel Relationships,” Journal of Marketing Research, 36 (May), 223–38. Gneezy, Uri and Aldo Rustichini (2000), “Pay Enough or Don’t Pay at All,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (3), 791– 810. Grant, Adam M. and Francesca Gino (2010), “A Little Thanks Goes a Long Way: Explaining Why Gratitude Expressions Motivate Prosocial Behavior,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98 (6), 946–55. Haws, Kelly L. and William O. Bearden (2006), “Dynamic Pricing and Consumer Fairness Perceptions,” Journal of Consumer Research, 33 (3), 304–311. REFERENCES Adams, J. Stacy (1963), “Toward an Understanding of Inequity,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67 (5), 422–36. ——— (1965), “Inequity in Social Exchange,” in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 2, Leonard Berkowitz, ed. New York: Academic Press, 267–99. Adaval, Rashmi and Robert S. Wyer Jr. (2011), “Conscious and Nonconscious Comparisons with Price Anchors: Effects on Willingness to Pay for Related and Unrelated Products,” Jour- nal of Marketing Research, 48 (April), 355–65. Algoe, Sara B., Barbara L. Fredrickson, and Shelly L. Gable (2013), “The Social Functions of the Emotion of Gratitude via Expression,” Emotion, 13 (4), 605–609. Anderson, Norman H. (1965), “Averaging Versus Adding as a Stimulus-Combination Rule in Impression Formation,” Jour- nal of Experimental Psychology, 70 (4), 394–400. Anik, Lalin, Lara B. Aknin, Michael I. Norton, Elizabeth W. Dunn, and Jordi Quoidbach (2013), “Prosocial Bonuses Increase Employee Satisfaction and Team Performance,” PLOS ONE, 8 (9), e75509. Ariely, Dan, Anat Bracha, and Stephan Meier (2009), “Doing Good or Doing Well? Image Motivation and Monetary Incen- tives in Behaving Prosocially,” American Economic Review, 99 (1), 544–55. Basu, Amiya K., Rajiv Lal, Venkataraman Srinivasan, and Richard Staelin (1985), “Salesforce Compensation Plans: An Agency Theoretic Perspective,” Marketing Science, 4 (4), 267–91. Berinsky, Adam J., Gregory A. Huber, and Gabriel S. Lenz (2012), “Evaluating Online Labor Markets for Experimental Research: Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk,” Political Analysis, 20 (3), 351–68. Boulding, William, Ajay Kalra, Richard Staelin, and Valarie A. Zeithaml (1993), “A Dynamic Process Model of Service Qual- ity: From Expectations to Behavioral Intentions,” Journal of Marketing Research, 30 (February), 7–27. Brown, Morton B. and Alan B. Forsythe (1974), “Robust Tests for the Equality of Variances,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 69 (346), 364–67. Cacioppo, John T. and Richard E. Petty (1982), “The Need for Cognition,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42 (1), 116–31. Charness, Gary (2004), “Attribution and Reciprocity in an Experi- mental Labor Market,” Journal of Labor Economics, 22 (3), 665–88. Cialdini, Robert B. and David A. Schroeder (1976), “Increasing Compliance by Legitimizing Paltry Contributions: When Even Should Firms Use Small Financial Benefits? / 89 Hilton, Denis J. (1995), “The Social Context of Reasoning: Con- versational Inference and Rational Judgment,” Psychological Bulletin, 118 (2), 248–71. Hoffman, Janet L. and Eric M. Lowitt (2008), “A Better Way to Design Loyalty Programs,” Strategy & Leadership, 36 (4), 44– 47. Hogarth, Robin M. and Hillel J. Einhorn (1992), “Order Effects in Belief Updating: The Belief-Adjustment Model,” Cognitive Psychology, 24 (1), 1–55. Hong, Sung-Mook (1992), “Hong’s Psychological Reactance Scale: A Further Factor Analytic Validation,” Psychological Reports, 70 (2), 512–14. ——— and Salvatora Faedda (1996), “Refinement of the Hong Psychological Reactance Scale,” Educational and Psychologi- cal Measurement, 56 (1), 173–82. Horton, John J., David G. Rand, and Richard J. Zeckhauser (2011), “The Online Laboratory: Conducting Experiments in a Real Labor Market,” Experimental Economics, 14 (3), 399– 425. Hsee, Christopher K. (1996), “The Evaluability Hypothesis: An Explanation for Preference Reversals Between Joint and Sepa- rate Evaluations of Alternatives,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 67 (3), 247–57. ———, George F. Loewenstein, Sally Blount, and Max H. Bazer- man (1999), “Preference Reversals Between Joint and Separate Evaluations of Options: A Review and Theoretical Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin, 125 (5), 576–90. ——— and Yuval Rottenstreich (2004), “Music, Pandas, and Mug- gers: On the Affective Psychology of Value,” Journal of Exper- imental Psychology: General, 133 (1), 23–30. Imas, Alex (2014), “Working for the ‘Warm Glow’: On the Bene- fits and Limits of Prosocial Incentives,” Journal of Public Eco- nomics, 114 (June), 14–18. John, Oliver P., Eileen M. Donahue, and Robert L. Kentle (1991), “The Big Five Inventory—Versions 4a and 54,” Institute for Personality and Social Research, University of California, Berkeley. Johnson, Michael D. and Christopher P. Puto (1987), “A Review of Consumer Judgment and Choice,” in Review of Marketing, Michael J. Houston, ed. Chicago: American Marketing Associ- ation, 236–92. Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky (1979), “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk,” Econometrica, 47 (2), 263–91. Lambert, Nathaniel M., Steven M. Graham, and Frank D. Fincham (2009), “A Prototype Analysis of Gratitude: Varieties of Grati- tude Experiences,” Personality and Social Psychology Bul- letin, 35 (9), 1193–1207. Lyon, Emily (2012), “Out with the Old Flooring and in with the New: How to Demolish Tile,” CleverHousewife.com (blog), (June 9), (accessed March 4, 2015), [available at http:// www. cleverhousewife.com/2012/06/out-with-the-old-flooring-and- in-with-the-new-how-to-demolish-tile/]. Okada, Erica Mina and Stephen J. Hoch (2004), “Spending Time Versus Spending Money,” Journal of Consumer Research, 31 (2), 313–23. Oliver, Richard L. (1977), “Effect of Expectation and Disconfir- mation on Postexposure Product Evaluations: An Alternative Interpretation,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 62 (4), 480–86. ———, P.V. (Sundar) Balakrishnan, and Bruce Barry (1994), “Out- come Satisfaction in Negotiation: A Test of Expectancy Dis- confirmation,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 60 (2), 252–75. O’Malley, Lisa (1998), “Can Loyalty Schemes Really Build Loy- alty?” Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 16 (1), 47–55. Reis, Harry T., Kennon M. Sheldon, Shelly L. Gable, Joseph Roscoe, and Richard M. Ryan (2000), “Daily Well-Being: The Role of Autonomy, Competence, and Relatedness,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26 (4), 419–35. Ruxton, Graeme D. (2006), “The Unequal Variance t-Test Is an Underused Alternative to Student’s t-Test and the Mann-Whitney U Test,” Behavioral Ecology, 17 (4), 688–90. Saini, Ritesh and Ashwani Monga (2008), “How I Decide Depends on What I Spend: Use of Heuristics Is Greater for Time than for Money,” Journal of Consumer Research, 34 (6), 914–22. skh (2013), comment on “Moving Company Recomendations [sic],” Google Groups: East Nashville, (March 7), (accessed March 4, 2015), [available at https://groups.google.com/forum/ #!msg/east-nashville/LnZoxcgGoFo/xT3RDYSGXUcJ]. Small, Deborah A., George Loewenstein, and Paul Slovic (2007), “Sympathy and Callousness: The Impact of Deliberative Thought on Donations to Identifiable and Statistical Victims,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 102 (2), 143–53. Stice, Eric (1998), “Relations of Restraint and Negative Affect to Bulimic Pathology: A Longitudinal Test of Three Competing Models,” International Journal of Eating Disorders, 23 (3), 243–60. Sunstein, Cass R. (1996), “Social Norms and Social Roles,” Columbia Law Review, 96 (4), 903–968. Tanner, Carmen (2008), “Context Effects in Environmental Judg- ments: Assimilation and Contrast Effects in Separation and Joint Evaluation Modes,” Journal of Applied Social Psychol- ogy, 38 (11), 2759–86. Valenzuela, Leslier M., Jay P. Mulki, and Jorge Fernando Jaramillo (2010), “Impact of Customer Orientation, Induce- ments and Ethics on Loyalty to the Firm: Customers’ Perspec- tive,” Journal of Business Ethics, 93 (2), 277–91. Van den Bos, Kees, E. Allan Lind, Riël Vermunt, and Henk A.M. Wilke (1997), “How Do I Judge My Outcome When I Do Not Know the Outcome of Others? The Psychology of the Fair Process Effect,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72 (5), 1034–46. Varadarajan, P. Rajan and Anil Menon (1988), “Cause-Related Marketing: A Coalignment of Marketing Strategy and Corpo- rate Philanthropy,” Journal of Marketing, 52 (July), 58–74. Weaver, Donald and Philip Brickman (1974), “Expectancy, Feed- back, and Disconfirmation as Independent Factors in Outcome Satisfaction,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30 (3), 420–28. Weaver, Kimberlee, Stephen M. Garcia, and Norbert Schwarz (2012), “The Presenter’s Paradox,” Journal of Consumer Research, 39 (3), 445–60. Yadav, Manjit S. (1994), “How Buyers Evaluate Product Bundles: A Model of Anchoring and Adjustment,” Journal of Consumer Research, 21 (2), 342–53. Young Entrepreneur Council (2014), “9 Virtual Ways to Thank Loyal Customers,” Small Business Trends, (February 10), (accessed March 4, 2015), [available at http://smallbiztrends. com/ 2014/02/ways-to-thank-loyal-customers-virtually.html]. 90 / Journal of Marketing, May 2015 APPENDIX B Study 3: Marketer-Provided Financial Benefit Reference Point A: Verbal Acknowledgment Condition B: Financial Acknowledgment (with 5% Discount) Condition C: Financial Acknowledgment (with 5% Discount) with Lower Reference Points Condition Web Appendix 1 Should Firms Use Small Financial Benefits to Express Appreciation to Consumers? Understanding and Avoiding Trivialization Effects Peggy J. Liu, Cait Lamberton, Kelly L. Haws Web Appendix APPENDIX W1: ADDITIONAL STIMULI FOR STUDIES 1A, 1B, 1C, 2A, AND 4 Study 1a: Hotel Field Study – Customer Review Questions 1. How many total nights have you stayed at [hotel conference center’s name]? 2. How many total meals have you eaten at [hotel conference center’s name]? 3. Have you ever visited [hotel conference center’s name]’s website? (yes, no) 4. Compared to other full-service conference centers or hotels that you have visited before, how does [hotel conference center’s name] compare? (1 = much worse to 7 = much better) 5. What are some things you like about [hotel conference center’s name]? 6. What are some things you dislike about [hotel conference center’s name]? 7. Please write a one-paragraph review of [hotel conference center’s name] for potential future patrons. You can write both positive and negative things - please be honest. Note: The hotel conference center’s name has been removed for its anonymity. Web Appendix 2 Study 1b: Competitor Feedback Study – Website Review Form Review form (page 1) Review form (page 2) Review form (page 3) Review form (page 4) Web Appendix 3 Study 1c: Dining Establishment Study – Customer Review Questions 1. How many total meals have you eaten at [dining establishment’s name]? 2. Have you ever visited [dining establishment’s name]’s website? (yes, no) 3. Compared to other dining places that you have eaten at on [university’s name]’s campus, how does [dining establishment’s name] compare? (1 = much worse to 7 = much better) 4. Please write a one-paragraph review of [dining establishment’s name] for potential future patrons. You can write both positive and negative things - please be honest. Note: The dining establishment’s name has been removed for its anonymity. Web Appendix 4 Study 2a: Varying Adherence to Verbal Gratitude Expression Norms – Website Review Form Review form (page 1) Review form (page 2) Review form (page 2 continued) Review form (page 3) Note: The business school’s name has been removed for its anonymity. Web Appendix 5 Study 4: Prosocial Benefit – Website Review Form Home page Review page Web Appendix 6 Web Appendix 7 APPENDIX W2: DEPENDENT VARIABLES FOR ALL STUDIES Study Dependent Variable 1a • Appreciation index: • After receiving this note, how appreciated do you feel by [conference center’s name] for providing customer feedback?” (1 = not at all appreciated, 7 = very much appreciated) • After receiving this note, how valued do you feel by [conference center’s name] for providing customer feedback? (1 = not at all valued, 7 = very much valued) • After receiving this note, how satisfied do you feel with [conference center name’s] response to acknowledge you for providing customer feedback? (1 = not at all satisfied, 7 = very much satisfied) 1b • Appreciation index: • After receiving this note, how appreciated do you feel by Pure Coffee & Tea for what you have done for its business? (1 = not at all appreciated, 7 = very much appreciated) • After receiving this note, how valued do you feel by Pure Coffee & Tea for what you have done for its business? (1 = not at all valued, 7 = very much valued) • After receiving this note, how satisfied do you feel with Pure Coffee & Tea’s response to what you have done for its business? (1 = not at all satisfied, 7 = very much satisfied) 1c • Appreciation index: • After receiving this note, how appreciated do you feel by [dining establishment parent company’s name] for providing customer feedback?” (1 = not at all appreciated, 7 = very much appreciated) • After receiving this note, how valued do you feel by [dining establishment parent company’s name] for providing customer feedback? (1 = not at all valued, 7 = very much valued) • After receiving this note, how satisfied do you feel with [dining establishment parent company’s name’s] response to acknowledge you for providing customer feedback? (1 = not at all satisfied, 7 = very much satisfied) 2a • Appreciation index: • After receiving this note, how appreciated do you feel by the [business school’s name] management team for your help?” (1 = not at all appreciated, 7 = very much appreciated) • After receiving this note, how valued do you feel by the [business school’s name] management team for your help? (1 = not at all valued, 7 = very much valued) • After receiving this note, how satisfied do you feel with the [business school’s name] management team’s response to your help? (1 = not at all satisfied, 7 = very much satisfied) 2b • After receiving this email, how appreciated would you feel by the store for all that you do for its business? (1 = not at all appreciated, 7 = very much appreciated) 3 • Appreciation index: • After receiving this note, how appreciated do you feel by the store for all that you do for its business? (1 = not at all appreciated, 7 = very much appreciated) • After receiving this note, how valued do you feel by the store for all that you do for its business? (1 = not at all valued, 7 = very much valued) • After receiving this note, how satisfied do you feel with the store for all that you do for its business? (1 = not at all satisfied, 7 = very much satisfied) 4 • Appreciation index: • After receiving this note, how appreciated do you feel by Fifth & Falls for what you have done for its business? (1 = not at all appreciated, 7 = very much appreciated) • After receiving this note, how valued do you feel by Fifth & Falls for what you have done for its business? (1 = not at all valued, 7 = very much valued) • After receiving this note, how satisfied do you feel with Fifth & Falls’ response to what you have done for its business? (1 = not at all satisfied, 7 = very much satisfied) Note: Study 2b was conducted prior to the other studies. We switched from a one-item dependent variable to a three-item dependent variable after conducting study 2b. Web Appendix 8 APPENDIX W3: ITEMS MEASURING ADHERENCE TO VERBAL GRATITUDE EXPRESSIONS NORMS 1. How sincere does this note seem to be? (1 = not at all sincere, 7 = very sincere) 2. To what extent does this note communicate in a way that’s appropriate in this context? (1 = not at all, 7 = very much so) Note: These items were used in pre-tests described in footnote 4, as check for verbal acknowledgment condition in study 1c, and as manipulation check for verbal acknowledgment conditions in study 2a. Copyright of Journal of Marketing is the property of American Marketing Association and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.