MCENTIRE_AmPoliSciRev_2015_evmg.pdf
aTwFFcxL5HMRT.ObsJP6sYf_PvLW-MCENTIRE_AmPoliSciRev_2015_evmg.pdf.plain.html

American Political Science Review Vol. 109, No. 3 August 2015 doi:10.1017/S0003055415000295 c© American Political Science Association 2015 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change: An Experimental Examination of Framing and Micromobilization KYLA JO MCENTIRE Indiana University Lilly Family School of Philanthropy MICHELE LEIBY The College of Wooster MATTHEW KRAIN The College of Wooster Human Right Organizations (HROs) attempt to shape individuals’ values and mobilize themto act. Yet little systematic research has been done to evaluate the efficacy of these efforts. Weidentified the three most common messaging techniques: (1) informational frames; (2) personal frames; and (3) motivational frames. We tested their efficacy using an experimental research design in which participants were randomly assigned to the control group (shown no campaign materials) or one of the treatment groups shown a campaign against sleep deprivation featuring one of these framing strategies. We then surveyed participants regarding their attitudes and their willingness to act. Results demonstrate that all three framing strategies are more effective at mobilizing consensus than action. Personal narratives are the most consistently successful, increasing individuals’ sense of knowledge on the issue and their emotional reaction to the issue, leading them to reject the practice and participate in a campaign to demand its cessation. INTRODUCTION Human Right Organizations (HROs) are cen-tral to efforts around the world to change thebehavior of governments toward the rights of their citizens. They leverage information regarding hu- man rights abuses into changes in behavior by naming perpetrators of rights violations, and shaming other members of the international community into acting to change the perpetrators’ behavior. While too often other international actors’ efforts to improve human rights practices have been ineffective or counterpro- ductive (Peksen 2009; 2012; Wood 2008), a burgeon- ing line of research has demonstrated the frequent success of HROs in changing human rights behavior (Becker 2012; Brysk 1993; Clark 2001; Hendrix and Wong 2013; Hertel 2006; Keck and Sikkink 1998; Krain 2012; Murdie 2009; Murdie and Bhasin 2011; Wong Kyla Jo McEntire, Indiana University Lilly Family School of Philan- thropy, 9328 Stones Ferry Way, Indianapolis, IN 46278 (kylamcen- tire@gmail.com). Michele Leiby is Assistant Professor, Department of Political Sci- ence, The College of Wooster, Kauke Hall, 400 E. University St, Wooster OH 44691 (mleiby@wooster.edu). Matthew Krain is Professor, Department of Political Science, The College of Wooster, Kauke Hall, 400 E. University St, Wooster OH 44691 (mkrain@wooster.edu). This research was performed under College of Wooster Human Subjects Research Committee Approvals HSRC 2012.037.1213 and HSRC 2013.09.001. An earlier version of this article was presented in Dayton, Ohio at the October 4, 2013 Conference on The Social Practice of Human Rights: Charting the Frontiers of Research and Advocacy. The authors would like to thank the College of Wooster’s Faculty Development Fund for providing financial support for this project, and Amnesty International USA for granting access to their National Office Records Archives. The authors would like to thank Latrice Burks and Michaela McNaughton for their research assis- tance on this project. The authors would also like to thank Jo Becker, Carroll Bogert, Angela L. Bos, Jon Breitenbucher, Lisa Bryant, Christopher Butler, Mark Lagon, Jeffrey S. Lantis, Andrew Min- gione, Carole Nagengast, Bas van Doorn, the journal’s editors, and four anonymous reviewers for their time, assistance, and comments on previous drafts of this article. A replication dataset, complete codebook, and do file can be found at www.MicheleLeiby.com 2012). However, not all HRO campaigns are successful, and in some cases they may have deleterious effects on human rights outcomes (Carpenter 2005). A de- tailed understanding of how to improve HRO efforts to shape human rights practices should therefore be of paramount importance to political scientists. Yet, the mechanism by which HROs generate the pressure nec- essary to convince states or international organizations to shame and sanction perpetrators is often assumed, and as a result is undertheorized and unexamined. We need to unpack the naming and shaming process that has previously been “black-boxed,” and peer inside at how HROs convert information about rights abuses into action against abusers. Without such examination, our understanding of the impact of HROs in world politics is incomplete. HRO micromobilization efforts work to mobilize consensus about the nature of rights abuses and then mobilize action to change rights behavior.1 They do this by attempting to shape individuals’ values on such contentious issues as the use of sleep deprivation as a method of interrogation and mobilizing them to act on their values. While much has been written describing this process of framing—“conscious strategic efforts . . . to fashion shared understandings of the world and of themselves that legitimize and motivate collective action” (Keck and Sikkink 1998, 3)—as vital to ad- vocacy efforts in general and human rights advocacy work specifically, little systematic research has been done evaluating the efficacy of framing on opinion or behavior (Benford and Snow 2000, 632). In this study, we begin to address these critical gaps in our understanding of how advocacy groups mobilize 1 HROs engage in many different types of activities (such as service provision, community outreach and education, or lobbying state gov- ernments), and may not engage at all in the kind of micromobilization campaigns we describe. However, even HROs such as Human Rights Watch that have not traditionally focused their efforts on persuading grassroots activists have increasingly engaged in more “broad-based” strategies (Wong 2012, 153). 407 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change August 2015 opinion and action to affect policy change. Using an experimental research design we test the efficacy of the three framing strategies most frequently used by large, international, Western-based HROs. How HROs relay information about human rights abuses, and how that information is received, may affect how able they are to mobilize consensus and action to change states’ human rights behavior. Therefore, our examination of HRO effectiveness begins at the individual level, examining international HRO efforts at micromobilization. Our results speak to the utility of the most common framing techniques in fostering consensus about the nature and severity of human rights violations (consensus mobi- lization), and the willingness of individuals exposed to those frames to mobilize to change them (action mobilization). HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (HROS) AS AGENTS OF CHANGE HROs and the Mobilization of Consensus and Action HROs—the specific type of NGOs focused on human rights issues—gather information that states do not want to be available to the public. Perpetrators of hu- man rights abuses generally prefer to avoid the spot- light so as to be able to continue these practices without scrutiny by global or local audiences. They also wish to avoid being labeled as norm violators, particularly if this results in suffering consequences for their actions. An HRO’s power lies in the information it possesses about these abuses, and how it uses that information to mobilize consensus that an issue is a human rights issue, and to mobilize action to address it (Becker 2012; Keck and Sikkink 1998). HROs mobilize consensus by spotlighting a rights abuse, and making others perceive that action as an abuse and the perpetrator as an abuser of human rights. HROs can then mobilize action to pressure those perpetrators to change their behavior, and en- courage other actors to shame or sanction the perpe- trators (Becker 2012; Brysk 1993; Keck and Sikkink 1998; Krain 2012; Murdie 2009; Murdie and Bhasin 2011; Wong 2012). Studies have shown that such ef- forts are often effective at changing the behavior of rights violators, reducing or eliminating the use of par- ticular human rights abuses in many instances (Becker 2012; Brysk 1993; Clark 2001; Hertel 2006; Hendrix and Wong 2013; Keck and Sikkink 1998; Krain 2012; Murdie 2009; Wong 2012). However, some important studies have found that HROs are strategic actors, and that sometimes their efforts can be problematic (Bob 2005; Carpenter 2005; Hafner-Burton 2008). The con- trast in findings suggests that analyzing differences in human rights campaigns may yield insight into differ- ences in HRO effectiveness in changing human rights outcomes. Although much of the literature has focused on how HROs mobilize consensus and action of elites on the global stage, none of that is possible without micromo- bilization efforts. HROs mobilize individuals directly, or assist local groups in mobilizing, to pressure tar- gets to change their human rights practices (Keck and Sikkink 1998; Murdie and Bhasin 2011). For instance, HRO campaigns spotlighting the practice of manufac- turing clothes in sweatshop conditions or with child labor have successfully convinced concerned citizens to view these issues as rights violations, and have trig- gered the mobilization of consumer boycotts. In turn, these actions have forced multinational corporations and host states to alter their labor practices (Elliott and Freeman 2003; Hertel 2006). Similarly, Amnesty International’s (AI) Urgent Action campaigns encour- age citizen activists to identify an issue as a human rights violation, and to act on it by communicating di- rectly with target governments to urge them to change their behavior. Governments previously able to act in the shadows are besieged with messages from people around the world, making it clear that rights viola- tions no longer go unseen (Hendrix and Wong 2013; Wong 2012). HRO efforts at educating local popula- tions about human rights issues yield greater appreci- ation for the human rights environment and a better understanding of governments’ failures to protect such rights (Davis et al. 2012; Welch 1995). This enables HROs to mobilize citizens to educate lawmakers about the nature and extent of the issues, and attempt to change their political calculus and behavior. Scholars have noted the far-reaching success of this tactic, from the campaign to end chattel slavery in Great Britain in the 19th century (Wong 2012) to the re- cent campaign in California to abolish sentences of life without parole for juvenile offenders (Becker 2012). However, these successes are only possible if HROs are able to convince citizens that a given issue is a human rights issue, and to subsequently take action to change the situation (Davis et al. 2012). To accomplish both of these tasks, HROs engage in framing. Despite its cen- trality to HRO activities, to our knowledge, there are no studies in the academic literature2 or within the ad- vocacy community that explicitly examine under what conditions framing is effective as a tool to build consen- sus and action mobilization on human rights issues. In conversations with key figures in international HROs such as Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, and Catholic Relief Services, advocacy professionals routinely noted that HROs would love to know what type(s) of framing works, both to design more effective campaigns and to justify efforts and expenditures to funders, but do not have the resources to examine the relative effects of these efforts. We contribute to this gap in the academic literature and in the knowledge base of practitioners by analyzing which framing strate- gies are most effective at aligning citizen views about human rights issues with that of the organization, and which are most effective at mobilizing citizens to act. 2 The closest is Ausderan (2014), which examines whether exposure to a press release on human rights abuses affects perceptions of the level of abuses in one’s own country. It does not test the relative efficacy of different types of messaging strategies, nor does it examine respondents’ subsequent actions. 408 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 American Political Science Review Vol. 109, No. 3 The Use of Frames to Mobilize Consensus and Action Frames are the rhetorical lenses or “schemata of inter- pretation” that help actors construct the way in which issues are likely to be viewed or understood (Goff- man 1974, 21). There are many frames through which individuals can view a given issue or situation (Ben- ford and Snow 2000; Chong and Druckman 2007). The frame employed affects how individuals process infor- mation, and helps individuals assign larger sociopolit- ical or cultural meaning to their own experiences and understandings (Domke et al. 1998; Scheufele 1999). Framing is the process by which some actor constructs a particular perception of reality about that issue by causing individuals to “develop a particular conceptu- alization of an issue or reorient their thinking about an issue” (Chong and Druckman 2007, 104; see also Goffman 1974; Nelson and Oxley 1999). Framing is a particularly effective way for political entrepreneurs to influence individuals as they consider information about sociopolitical issues. Framing affects how individuals connect their values to political issues (Brewer 2002; Nelson et al. 1997). When exposed to a particular frame, people tend to assign greater weight to the value that the frame invokes (Nelson et al. 1997). Frames have even been found to “influence how citi- zens explain their thoughts about an issue in their own words” (Brewer 2002, 304). Transnational advocacy networks, like other social movements and their component organizations, must frame issues to “make them comprehensible to target audiences, to attract attention and encourage action” (Keck and Sikkink 1999, 90). Movements and organi- zations actively engage in the framing of social prob- lems to bring individuals’ views on the issues at hand in line with their own, a process known as consen- sus mobilization (Klandermans 1984). Since consensus mobilization is necessary for movement participation, the ability to effectively employ frames plays a sig- nificant part in action mobilization and the ability to shape public policy (Gamson 1995; Klandermans 1984; Snow et al. 1986; Snow and Benford, 1992). However, action mobilization is not a guaranteed outcome, and may require additional framing efforts (Klandermans 1988). Different frames have different impacts on the im- portance that individuals place on their beliefs about issues and action, and elicit different responses from those individuals (Druckman 2001; Shen 2004). For ex- ample, the voter mobilization literature suggests that an individual is more likely to vote when he or she perceives his or her vote as instrumental to affecting the outcome, when the costs of voting are minimal, and when the psychic benefits of participation are high (Duffy and Tavits, 2008; Sigelman and Berry 1982). The latter includes complying with and reiterating so- cial norms about participation, and gaining a sense of efficacy and importance through being able to ex- press one’s preference (Riker and Ordeshook, 1968). In short, different frames tap into different elements that may be critical to one’s decision to participate po- litically, such as lowered costs of participating, greater feelings of empathy, or an increased sense of efficacy and agency. It is to these themes that we now turn. THE EXPECTED EFFECTS OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF FRAMES In order to determine which frames are used most fre- quently by large, international, Western-based HROs, we conducted field work in the Amnesty Interna- tional USA (AI-USA) archives at Columbia Univer- sity, which houses all of the institutional materials of AI-USA.3 A sample of over 3,000 photos of their pro- motional and advocacy materials was collected and an- alyzed to gather information on the frames employed by AI to influence citizens’ attitudes and behavior. The most common frames employed by AI in these documents were (1) informational frames, where the focus is to educate the reader by presenting them with facts and statistics; (2) personal frames, where a per- sonal narrative is told with the aim of emotionally im- pacting the reader, and creating a sense of empathy for the aggrieved; and (3) motivational frames, which emphasize the reader’s agency and potential efficacy, and include a direct appeal to take action. Informa- tional frames were the most common, appearing in all of the campaign materials reviewed. This makes sense in that most campaign ads, regardless of other framing techniques, will present some basic information on the issue at stake. Personal and motivational frames were employed in 77 and 70 percent of the AI campaigns, respectively. As one can infer, AI often used all three framing strategies together in the same campaign ad. We also examined recent campaign materials from Physicians for Human Rights and Oxfam Interna- tional, and had conversations with advocates at Hu- man Rights Watch, Catholic Relief Services, American Jewish World Service, and Doctors without Borders, confirming that other large, Western-based HROs also most regularly employ these three frames in their ef- forts to mobilize consensus and action. Given their prevalence, our study focuses on understanding the ef- fectiveness of informational, personal and motivational frames. In the following section, we discuss each frame, how and why they are typically used and how they are likely to impact individuals’ opinions and actions regarding human rights. Informational Frames Informational frames are frames that provide objective information or statistics. These frames rely on the as- sumption that by increasing an individual’s knowledge about the issue, s/he is more likely to see the issue as problematic and want to do something about it. 3 The collection contains 107.52 linear feet of information about the AIUSA organization and its national office from 1966 to 2003. Types of information contained in the archives include administra- tion, decision-making processes, fundraising, and the work of the section and its membership (Amnesty International of the USA, Inc.: National Office Records). 409 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change August 2015 Studies have found that the more knowledge individu- als have about human rights issues, the more likely they are to report greater interest in human rights, an in- creased desire to get involved, and a greater likelihood of engaging in human rights activism (Cohrs et al. 2007; Stellmacher et al. 2005). In addition, voter mobilization studies show that providing factual information about an issue reduces the costs associated with information gathering, yielding a significant and sizeable impact on an individual’s likelihood of political participation (Haspel and Knotts 2005; Ladner and Pianzola 2010; Larcinese 2007). HROs routinely use an informational frame to lever- age their strengths in gathering and disseminating in- formation about abuses to help inform and mobilize. As Jo Becker, a twenty-year veteran of numerous global and local human rights campaigns, notes, “[b]y spotlighting patterns of abuse, advocates can often let facts speak for themselves” (Becker 2012, 251). Becker notes that the campaign to abolish sentences of life without parole for juvenile offenders “backed its argu- ments regarding young people’s capacity for rehabili- tation with recent findings from neuroscience on ado- lescent brain development,” information that proved key to mobilizing consensus on this human rights issue (Becker 2012, 228). In fact, she reports that “when asked about the most effective aspect of the campaign, two family members of juvenile offenders serving life terms had a similar response. ‘Cold hard facts’ . . . ” (2012, 241). Similarly, Keck and Sikkink (1998, 183) report that the international women’s movement found its greatest successes in “promoting change by report- ing facts.” Movement activists used that information both to shame governments into addressing human rights abuses and to inspire greater mobilization of grassroots activists. Few studies have specifically examined the effective- ness of NGOs’ use of informational frames in changing attitudes and behavior. A notable exception is the work done by Davis et al. (2012), which demonstrated that public opinion about state respect for human rights changes when citizens are provided with information about government abuses by HROs. Absent such infor- mation, people do not change their beliefs about their government’s respect for human rights, even in the face of worsening governmental abuses of those rights. Informational frames should be effective at provid- ing requisite information necessary to change opinions and mobilize consensus, and to increase the likelihood of the mobilization of action.4 Thus, we hypothesize: 4 There are multiple ways to frame the same information, which might affect how influential the provision of that information actu- ally is. For instance, numerous studies have verified Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) insight that individuals are risk averse when choices are framed in terms of losses (see Meyerowitz and Chaiken 1987 and Hiscox 2006). To simplify our research design, we hold the framing of information constant, though we acknowledge that varying the way in which information is framed would be an important study in its own right. H1: Exposure to informational frames during an HRO cam- paign will result in greater alignment between individuals’ and the HRO’s opinions regarding the campaign issue. H2: Exposure to informational frames during an HRO cam- paign will increase individuals’ self-reported and observed willingness to mobilize around the campaign issue. Because informational frames gain their power via the provision of facts, we further hypothesize: H3: Exposure to informational frames during an HRO cam- paign will increase individuals’ self-reported and observed knowledge about the campaign issue. Personal Frames Personal frames focus the audience’s attention on a particular episode such as the plight of an individual, rather than on broader factual information about the rights issue. Like a testimonial, but told by a third party, a personal frame “personifies abuse as the story of a single suffering individual who is warranted as repre- sentative, while it is narrated with features that connect to mass publics” (Brysk 2013, 12). It trades a focus on cold hard facts, which may create distance from the audience, for the humanization of victims of the abuse, and the creation of empathy. It is used intentionally to personalize, dramatize, and emotionalize the issue (Valkenburg et al. 1999). This common convention in journalism, but also in activism, has a significant effect on viewer perceptions (Iyengar 1991; Zillmann 1999). For instance, in one type of personal frame, an injus- tice frame, “movements identify the ‘victims’ of a given injustice and amplify their victimization” (Benford and Snow 2000, 615; see also Gamson 1995). The audi- ence is asked to empathize with the victims, perhaps by imagining themselves or a loved one facing a simi- lar situation. In an unscripted, but perfect illustration, when asked how AI goes about convincing the skeptic to care about a particular human rights issue, Dr. Ca- role Nagengast, Chair of AI-USA Board of Directors responded: Close your eyes and imagine the person most dear in your life. Now, imagine that he or she is being dragged away, beaten, hair pulled, teeth yanked, beaten with a stick, in order to give information about her or his political activi- ties, or maybe because of his or her religious orientation or sexual orientation. What would you do? (Nagengast 2013). By establishing a personal connection between the reader and the individual in the story, the audience is more likely to feel empathy and to prioritize the issue and want to affect change (Carpenter 2005; Scheufele 1999). Studies of media framing seem to bear out that per- sonal frames play a crucial role in the way individ- uals process information. One study found that “re- spondents who had just read a story framed in terms of human interest emphasized emotions and individ- ual implications in their responses significantly more 410 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 American Political Science Review Vol. 109, No. 3 often” (Valkenburg et al. 1999, 565). Humanization and identification with victims have been shown to have powerful effects on mobilizing consensus and action (Hunt 2007; Monroe 1996). Small and Lowenstein’s (2003) experiment demonstrated that narratives about “identifiable victims” were more likely to evoke sym- pathy and move people to donate to causes working on their behalf than more informational narratives about “statistical victims.” Similarly, Kogut and Ritov (2005) found that participants in their experiments were more willing to help a single identified victim than multiple nonidentified ones, and confirmed that this effect was as a result of the respondent’s emotional reaction to the identifiable victim. It appears that while information can be persuasive, framing issues in terms of a specific individual is more effective at prompting change.5 HROs employ personal frames frequently as they try to mobilize their base supporters to act. Since its founding, Amnesty International (AI) has used per- sonal frames very effectively in their campaigns. AI’s adoption of “prisoners of conscience” humanized the plight of political prisoners by identifying spotlight cases and telling an evocative story about the indi- viduals in detention and the conditions under which they were held (Benenson 1961). AI then used this personalized information about detention to mobilize volunteers to write letters directly to state officials on the detainee’s behalf (Wong 2012). Similarly, the International Campaign to Ban Land- mines used emotive images of devastating injuries children sustained as a result of landmine accidents to humanize the victims and stir emotions of politi- cians and potential activists alike. The United Nations Association-USA’s Adopt a Minefield Program helped members of the public connect on a personal level to the issue by giving them the opportunity to “adopt” a particular area containing landmines, learn more about the individuals and communities affected, and raise funds to remove the mines (Warkentin and Mingst 2000). This suggests that personal frames should be very ef- fective at eliciting an emotional reaction, personalizing the issue, making it more salient, and making people feel a greater need to act. We hypothesize: H4: Exposure to personal frames during an HRO campaign will result in greater alignment between individuals’ and the HRO’s opinions regarding the campaign issue. H5: Exposure to personal frames during an HRO cam- paign will increase individuals’ self-reported and observed willingness to mobilize around the campaign issue. Since personal frames gain their power via the evo- cation of an emotional reaction through identification with and humanization of the victims of rights abuses, we further hypothesize: 5 When prompted to think both about the effects on an individual identifiable victim and the effects on statistical victims, the addition of statistical information may actually have a dulling effect, decreasing sympathy for and action on behalf of the identifiable victim (Small et al. 2007). H6: Exposure to personal frames during an HRO campaign will heighten individuals’ emotional reaction to the cam- paign issue, particularly regarding the consequences for the central person(s) in the campaign. Motivational Frames In the social movement literature, motivational frames are consistently recognized as affecting behavior (Benford and Snow 2000). Social movement organi- zations (SMOs) are faced with the task of convincing members that the cause they are fighting for is both obtainable and worthy of action. Motivational frames are a call to arms “intended to mobilize potential ad- herents and constituents, to garner bystander support and to demobilize antagonists” (Benford and Snow 2000, 614). They motivate individuals to act by creating feelings of agency and efficacy—suggesting that they can act, and that their actions can create the desired outcomes (Gamson 1995). When individuals think that their political partici- pation will be pivotal to achieving the outcome they desire, they are more likely to participate (Duffy and Tavits 2008; Edlin et al. 2007). For instance, in studies of get-out-the-vote campaigns, messages that explicitly appeal to voter efficacy, including explicit statements that “your vote can make a difference” have a signifi- cant positive effect on voter mobilization (Green et al. 2003). This is true even when an individual’s efforts are not actually pivotal to the success of a campaign, since people tend to overestimate the importance of their own participation (Duffy and Tavits 2008). Moreover, participation may be more likely when “a small effort yields a substantial expected social gain” (Edlin et al. 2007, 297). While there has been some analysis of the use of motivational frames in human rights campaigns (Harlow 2012; Kim et al. 2014), to our knowledge, there have been no empirical studies of the effectiveness of motivational frames on the behavior of individuals tar- geted for mobilization by HROs.6 Given what we know from the voter mobilization and social movements lit- eratures, motivational frames that explicitly call on the individual to act, suggesting that their participation is crucial, and that limited effort can yield a positive social good, should increase the motivation to act and the likelihood of action. Therefore, we hypothesize: H7: Exposure to motivational frames during an HRO cam- paign will increase individuals’ self-reported and observed willingness to mobilize around the campaign issue. Because motivational frames explicitly work by in- creasing individuals’ sense of personal agency, we hy- pothesize: 6 Harlow (2012) and Kim et al. (2014) examine the use of motiva- tional frames by Facebook users but do not examine HRO activity. Kim and Yoo (2014) identify which types of frames individual on-line activists and other members of the online public use most frequently in the context of a South Korean movement, while Harlow (2012) examines how the use of motivational frames online led to offline protests in a Guatemalan justice movement. 411 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change August 2015 H8: Exposure to motivational frames during an HRO cam- paign will increase individuals’ reported level of agency. Although these direct appeals for action on their own may successfully mobilize individuals in get out the vote or blood drive campaigns, where the issue is al- ready so thoroughly contextualized and its importance imbedded in public discourse as to not require addi- tional justification, we do not expect this to necessarily transfer to such contested issues as human rights. Be- cause motivational frames do not contain detailed in- formation about the issue, nor do they present personal narratives to humanize the victims, we hypothesize: H9: Exposure to motivational frames during an HRO cam- paign will have no impact on alignment between individu- als’ and the HRO’s opinions regarding the campaign issue. The hypotheses above address two central research questions: First, are informational, personal, and moti- vational frames effective at mobilizing consensus and action on human rights issues? Are individuals who see human rights campaigns featuring one of these fram- ing strategies more likely to agree that a violation has occurred, and subsequently more likely to get involved in a campaign to end the practice? Second, if they are effective, what is the mechanism through which these frames change individuals’ beliefs and actions? However, a third question remains—which of these commonly used framing strategies is most effective? Knowing which technique is most likely to yield the greatest effects is of paramount importance for HROs facing significant resource constraints. It is not surpris- ing that motivational frames are so important in voter mobilization campaigns, as much of what we know about voting suggests how central an individual’s cal- culation about her or his impact is to their decision. Yet this logic does not work as well in application to human rights activism, where most theorizing suggests the importance of empathy and emotional reaction in mobilizing consensus and action. Similarly, informa- tion about human rights abuses may be important in spurring mobilization, but we believe it is not sufficient. Facts alone should do less to make others focus on the problem as central and in need of their action than efforts that help people identify with other humans in distress. We argue that there is an inherent fit between human rights issues and personal frames. By definition, human rights focus on those rights or freedoms that are nec- essary to preserving the basic humanity of all persons. Empathy generated by personal narratives about the humanity of others was crucial to the development and diffusion of the very idea of human rights (Hunt 2007), as well as altruism inherent in the willingness to act on behalf of the suffering of others (Monroe 1996). Personal frames remind the audience of the inalien- ability of these rights by humanizing the subject and connecting the audience to him or her. They should elicit strong emotional reactions based on a connection formed from a sense of a common humanity, and the recognition of the inhumanity of rights abuses. This, in turn, should yield both consensus and action mobiliza- tion. Therefore, we hypothesize: H10: Exposure to personal frames during an HRO cam- paign will have a greater impact on alignment between individuals’ and the HRO’s opinions regarding the cam- paign issue than exposure to informational or motivational frames. H11: Exposure to personal frames during an HRO cam- paign will have a greater impact on self-reported and ob- served willingness to mobilize around the campaign issue than exposure to informational or motivational frames. Table 1 below summarizes each hypothesis according to the research question being examined. METHODS AND DATA To test these hypotheses, we designed an experiment wherein a fictitious human rights organization, The Hu- man Rights Initiative, launched four campaigns on the use of sleep deprivation during police interrogations. Using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) platform, we recruited 826 survey respondents. Each participant was randomly assigned to one of four treatment groups representing each of the different HRO frames, or a control group that was not exposed to a frame. The treatment groups were each shown the corresponding ad campaign about sleep deprivation as an interroga- tion technique, after which they were asked a series of questions about their attitudes on the issue. The con- trol group was shown no ad campaign and was taken directly to the survey. We chose the Human Rights Initiative as our institu- tional front to provide a perceived level of legitimacy to the campaign. The Human Rights Initiative shares its name with a few academic programs, but is distinct from the largest and most well known HROs. As such, it is unlikely that participants in the study would recog- nize the name or carry any preformed ideas regarding the group’s work. This anonymity is essential in order to avoid any effect an organization’s reputation may have on individuals’ opinions and actions, thus allowing us to isolate the independent impact of each frame.7 Similarly, the design of the logo was driven by our concerns to create an HRO campaign that appeared official, while avoiding the introduction of any poten- tially biasing element. The dove, olive branches, and open palm are commonly associated with the human rights community, but should not conjure memories of any particular HRO. We used gray scale to avoid the influence of color on the audience’s reactions and emotions (Valdez and Mehrabian 1994). Our HRO’s name and logo appeared on all pages of the survey for all participants (including the control group), to ensure that its presence did not bias the results. 7 Framing and persuasion effects depend on the source of the mes- sage; only credible sources have measurable effects on individual opinions (Druckman 2001). This is particularly true in the case of human rights campaigns, where, as Brysk (2013, 55) notes, “[i]n speaking rights to power, the messenger matters.” 412 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 American Political Science Review Vol. 109, No. 3 TABLE 1. Hypotheses Research Question Hypotheses Are they effective? H1 Exposure to informational frames during an HRO campaign will result in greater alignment between individuals’ and the HRO’s opinions regarding the campaign issue. H2 Exposure to informational frames during an HRO campaign will increase individuals’ self-reported and observed willingness to mobilize around the campaign issue. H4 Exposure to personal frames during an HRO campaign will result in greater alignment between individuals’ and the HRO’s opinions regarding the campaign issue. H5 Exposure to personal frames during an HRO campaign will increase individuals’ self-reported and observed willingness to mobilize around the campaign issue. H8 Exposure to motivational frames during an HRO campaign will have no impact on alignment between individuals’ and the HRO’s opinions regarding the campaign issue. H7 Exposure to motivational frames during an HRO campaign will increase individuals’ self-reported and observed willingness to mobilize around the campaign issue. If so, how? H3 Exposure to informational frames during an HRO campaign will increase individuals’ self-reported and observed knowledge about the campaign issue. H6 Exposure to personal frames during an HRO campaign will heighten individuals’ emotional reaction to the campaign issue, particularly regarding the consequences for the central person(s) in the campaign. H9 Exposure to motivational frames during an HRO campaign will increase individuals’ sense of personal agency. Which is the most effective? H10 Exposure to personal frames during an HRO campaign will have a greater impact on alignment between individuals’ and the HRO’s opinions regarding the campaign issue than exposure to informational or motivational frames. H11 Exposure to personal frames during an HRO campaign will have a greater impact on individuals’ self-reported and observed willingness to mobilize around the campaign issue than exposure to informational or motivational frames Even among those individuals who are sensitized to human rights issues and predisposed to mobilize in their defense, given limited time and resources, there may be a greater willingness to get involved when the violation is perceived as particularly egregious. Focus- ing on the “lesser” offense of sleep deprivation rep- resents a hard test of our mobilizing strategies. There is considerable variation in Americans’ attitudes re- garding the acceptability of sleep deprivation in com- parison to more “serious” violations. In a recent sur- vey, Richards et al. (2012) find that “leaves no marks” interrogation techniques, including sleep deprivation, hooding, and verbal assaults, are more widely accepted than techniques employing direct physical violence (80–81). Fifty-six percent of respondents found sleep deprivation an acceptable interrogation technique in some cases; only 44 percent found it unacceptable in all cases (Richards et al. 2012, 80). In an earlier study, Gronke et al. (2010) found that, of all possible torture techniques asked about in U.S. public opinion polls, sleep deprivation garnered the greatest amount of sup- port (65%), while only 35% of respondents opposed its use. Therefore, we can assume that before viewing our human rights campaign many participants may believe sleep deprivation to be an appropriate interrogation tool. Last, because the context of the narrative could greatly impact individuals’ attitudes and behavior, we carefully constructed the violation to occur during a “peacetime” civilian police interrogation to avoid any explicit connection to the terrorist attacks of Septem- ber 11, 2001, the subsequent “Global War on Terror,” or the events of any particular country. The campaigns were then distributed to participants who, after reading the campaign ad, were surveyed regarding their attitudes and potential participation in an anti-sleep-deprivation effort. Participants were recruited for the study through MTurk,8 an online platform that allows “requesters” to pay workers (or “Mturkers”) to complete small tasks. While partici- pants were paid $0.75, higher than that offered by social and psychological experimenters using MTurk (Berin- sky et al. 2012; Mason and Suri 2012; Paolacci et al. 2010), compensation for MTurkers completing surveys has been found to affect only the rate of responses, not the quality of the data (Buhrmester et al. 2011). The job ad asked, “[p]lease participate in the follow- ing short opinion survey.” To avoid any selection effects 8 Numerous studies in the last few years have established MTurk as a reliable source of data for social science research, often by replicating experimental findings that used traditional samples, internet, college, or other convenience samples (Berinsky et al. 2012; Buhrmester et al. 2011; Paolacci et al. 2010). Of particular relevance to our study, Berinsky et al. (2012) replicate three different experiments exam- ining framing effects, the results of which were remarkably similar to those in the original studies. For a thorough discussion of the strengths and limitations of MTurk for data collection in the social sciences, see Berinsky et al. (2012) and Paolacci et al. (2010). For an excellent guide on conducting experiments using MTurk, see Mason and Suri (2012). 413 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change August 2015 FIGURE 1. Informational Frame Note: Information regarding the practice and consequences of sleep deprivation presented in this campaign reflects findings cited in the medical and social psychology literatures (Blagrove 1996, Kahn-Greene, et al. 2007, Pilcher and Huffcutt 1996). While plausible, the Human Rights Initiative’s investigation into recent incidents of sleep deprivation during police interrogation was fabricated for this study in order to mirror statements made in the personal and motivational frames regarding the ineffectiveness of sleep deprivation for gathering accurate information. (wherein potential participants would select in or out of the survey based on their preconceived notions of its contents), no mention of human rights, sleep depriva- tion, or police interrogation was made. Workers were required to be at least 18 years of age, live in the United States,9 and have a completed task satisfaction rate of at least 85 percent to participate in the study. Participants were randomly assigned to the control group or one of four treatment groups by the online survey software.10 Each was then presented with the front page of the survey, containing the Human Rights Initiative’s official logo. Those in the treatment groups were directed to a second page, where they were asked to read the relevant campaign message before proceed- ing to the questionnaire. Those in the control group received no campaign message and were taken directly to the questionnaire.11 The informational, personal, and motivational campaigns are shown in Figures 1– 3 below.12 We consulted AI-USA’s historical archive of advocacy materials, as well as more recent campaign 9 To confirm respondents’ residency, we looked up their IP address using http://ip-lookup.net. Respondents with non-U.S.-based IP ad- dresses were excluded from our sample. 10 Our experiment and survey was conducted through Qualtrics (http://www.qualtrics.com). 11 All respondents saw the same survey questions in the same order. 12 Figure 2 shows the personal-male frame. With the exception of replacing “Andrew” with “Andrea” and replacing all gender-specific materials from Amnesty International, Physicians for Human Rights, and Oxfam International to ensure that the language, style, and tone of the treatments was comparable to that which individuals would actually be exposed to during an HRO campaign. We also made sure that the basic content was similar across all four treatments; each frame identified sleep deprivation as ineffective, inhumane, and occurring in the context of police interrogation. The physiological and psychologi- cal effects discussed in more detail in the informational and personal frames were also intentionally parallel to enhance comparability across treatments. The survey was designed to offer at least one di- rect and/or indirect measure of the dependent, in- dependent, and intervening variables in our theoret- ical model. The first dependent variable, consensus mobilization—fostering agreement about the nature and severity of an issue—is measured on an ordi- nal scale of 1 to 5 indicating a respondent’s agree- ment/disagreement with the statement, “Sleep depriva- tion is an appropriate police interrogation technique.” The second dependent variable, action mobilization— the ability to get individuals to mobilize for social change—is measured both indirectly and directly. First, respondents are asked how (un)likely they are to either pronouns and familial relationships, the text of each campaign mes- sage is identical. 414 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 American Political Science Review Vol. 109, No. 3 FIGURE 2. Personal (Male) Frame Note: The case of Andrew (or Andrea) presented in this campaign, while plausible, was fabricated for this study. FIGURE 3. Motivational Frame support or participate in a campaign to ban sleep de- privation. Both responses are recorded on an ordinal scale, ranging from 1 (very unlikely) to 5 (very likely). Next, respondents are given the opportunity to add their name to (fictitious) petitions to be sent to the Attorney General and the UN Special Rapporteur for Human Rights, demanding the immediate end to the use of sleep deprivation during police interrogations. Their willingness to take this direct action is recorded dichotomously, 1 if they “click” to add their name, 0 if they do not. Table 2 provides a full description of each variable, how it was captured in the survey, and how it was measured. A complete list of survey questions is presented in Appendix A. Descriptive statistics for these variables are presented in Appendix B. A demographic profile for the control and each treatment group is presented in Table 3. As we would expect with random assignment, difference of means 415 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change August 2015 TABLE 2. Variables and Measurements Variable Survey Question Measurement Dependent Variable Consensus mobilization Sleep deprivation is an appropriate police interrogation technique. Ordinal scale 1–5 Action mobilization (indirect) How likely are you to participate in a campaign to ban sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique? How likely are you to support a campaign to ban sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique? Action mobilization (direct) If you would like to add your name to a petition to be sent to the Attorney General, demanding the immediate end to the use of sleep deprivation during police interrogations, please click YES below. Dichotomous If you would like to add your name to a petition to be sent to the United Nations Special Rapporteur for Human Rights, demanding the immediate end to the use of sleep deprivation during police interrogations, please click YES below. Independent No treatment (Randomly assigned by survey software) Dichotomous Informational treatment Personal (m) treatment Personal (f) treatment Mobilization treatment Intervening Knowledge of issue (indirect) I feel knowledgeable about the use of sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique. Ordinal scale 1–5 I feel knowledgeable about the consequences of sleep deprivation on individuals who have experienced it. I feel knowledgeable about the effectiveness of sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique. Knowledge of issue (direct) Depriving an individual of sleep during an interrogation is an ineffective way to gain reliable information. Ordinal scale 1–5 Depriving an individual of sleep during interrogation has a negative impact of their long-term mental and physical well-being. Emotional response to issue (indirect) How much of an emotional reaction do you experience when thinking about the use of sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique? Ordinal scale 1–4 My feelings about sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique are at least partly because of its consequences for individuals who have experienced it. Ordinal scale 1–5 My feelings about sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique are at least partly because of how effective or ineffective it is. Emotional response to issue (direct) How do you feel when thinking about the use of sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique? Ordinal scale 1–5 Control Age What is your age in years? Ratio Gender Which of the following best describes your gender? Nominal (male, female, transgender, other)a Education What is the highest level of education that you have completed? Ordinal scale 1–7 News consumption How often do you follow world news? Ordinal scale 1–5 Agency How much influence do you think you can have in shaping public policy? Ordinal scale 1–4 a Five of 826 respondents chose either the “transgender” or the “other” option. Ultimately, these cases dropped out of our analysis, leaving us with only self-reported “male” and “female” participants. t tests show that there are no statistically significant differences in the age, gender, and level of education across participants in the control group or any of the treatment groups. In addition, participants’ profiles ap- pear to be consistent with those of other studies using MTurk (Berinsky et al. 2012; Buhrmester et al. 2011; Paolacci et al. 2010), many of which find high levels of internal consistency of self-reported demographics 416 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 American Political Science Review Vol. 109, No. 3 TABLE 3. Demographic Profile of Control and Treatment Groupsa Personal Personal Control Info. (m) (f) Motivational Age (mean years) 33.21 32.23 32.49 30.70 32.86 Gender % male 57 54 58 52 58 % female 43 46 42 48 42 Education (%) Some high school 1 1 0 0 1 High school grad. 10 10 12 12 13 Some tech./college 24 30 31 29 24 Tech./Assoc. degree 7 7 9 7 8 College degree 46 43 38 44 40 Grad. degree 10 8 8 8 13 Professional degree 2 1 2 1 1 News (%) Never 0 0 0 3 0 Rarely 10 15 14 14 12 Several times/month 21 21 19 18 22 Once/week 20 24 27 20 21 Daily 49 40 40 45 45 Agency (%) A lot 15 18 19 15 17 Some 54 52 51 53 47 Little 27 29 25 26 33 None 4 1 5 6 3 N 168 165 169 163 161 a Percentages may not add to 100 due to rounding. by MTurkers (Mason and Suri 2012; Rand 2012). Most studies conclude that “Mechanical Turk workers are at least as representative of the U.S. population as traditional subject pools, with gender, race, age and education of Internet samples matching the population more closely than college undergraduate samples and internet samples in general” (Paolacci et al. 2010, 414; see also Berinsky et al. 2012; Buhrmester et al. 2011). MTurkers are slightly younger, a bit more liberal, and slightly more educated than the average respondent in traditional samples (Berinsky et al. 2012). We suspected that the characteristics of MTurkers more generally, and of our sample specifically, matched quite well the target demographic for HRO advocacy materials, particularly large, Western-based HROs.13 To verify this, we spoke with individuals at the AI- USA main office and regional offices, Human Rights Watch, Doctors without Borders, Catholic Relief Ser- vices, American Jewish World Service, and Abolition Ohio who play key roles in their organizations’ advo- cacy efforts. Most suggested that while they attempt to target a broad and representative cross section of the entire population, they are most likely to reach people that fit the profile described above. One interviewee at a major international HRO indicated that this is due in part to the lists of people that HROs purchase, which come predominantly from sources such as maga- zines that tend to target this demographic (Anonymous 13 While many international HROs cover abusive practices in less developed countries, the target audience for consensus and action mobilization is often not the population where those abuses are occurring, but rather the citizens of the global North. Given this, it is likely that the audience’s education level is not significantly different from that reported by our respondents. 2013). As a result, the sampling frame that HROs use to generate a mailing list is itself already skewed younger, more liberal, and better educated, leading to a slightly biased sample. Another interviewee suggested that the increasing use of the internet to mobilize consensus and action makes those they target for advocacy appeals more like the demographic of MTurkers and less like the demographic of the typical rank-and-file members of the organization (O’Keefe 2013). In sum, MTurk generates samples that may not be nationally representative, but are highly representa- tive of the population targeted by HROs. This makes MTurk an ideal tool for experimental studies examin- ing the effects of HRO framing. We are confident that our sample is likely more representative of the typical target of HRO advocacy efforts than would be a more traditional random sample, or any other convenience sample. We use ordered logit to analyze our data because the dependent variables are not continuous, but rather ordinal (or dichotomous in the case of the direct mea- sures of action mobilization). Tables 4–9 present the results of our analyses. We report the coefficients and robust standard errors for each variable. We also report the predicted probabilities to capture the substantive impact of each independent variable on the dependent variable. RESULTS In this section, we present the results from our anal- yses, testing the impact of various messaging tech- niques on individuals’ perceptions and actions on the issue of sleep deprivation. We find that the three most 417 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change August 2015 TABLE 4. Ordered Logit Results, Models 1–5a Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 1 Reported Reported AG UN Appropriate Support Participation Petition Petition Treatments Informational − 0.847∗∗∗ 0.411∗ 0.605∗∗ 0.359 0.338 (0.193) (0.192) (0.203) (0.249) (0.248) Personal (m) − 1.387∗∗∗ 1.145∗∗∗ 1.334∗∗∗ 0.663∗∗ 0.612∗ (0.216) (0.190) (0.192) (0.240) (0.240) Personal (f) − 1.269∗∗∗ 0.776∗∗∗ 1.063∗∗∗ 0.551∗ 0.558∗ (0.215) (0.215) (0.200) (0.246) (0.247) Motivational − 0.441∗ 0.295 0.449∗ 0.380 0.260 (0.197) (0.194) (0.197) (0.249) (0.251) Controls Age 0.006 − 0.007 0.007 0.005 0.007 (0.006) (0.006) (0.006) (0.007) (0.007) Gender 0.092 0.090 − 0.228 − 0.020 0.048 (0.137) (0.131) (0.132) (0.160) (0.161) Education 0.012 − 0.025 − 0.088 0.011 0.009 (0.053) (0.051) (0.050) (0.060) (0.060) News − 0.100 0.155∗ 0.089 0.109 0.108 (0.064) (0.060) (0.058) (0.075) 0.075 Agency 0.111 0.329∗∗∗ 0.655∗∗∗ 0.407∗∗∗ 0.457∗∗∗ (0.089) (0.092) (0.096) (0.105) (0.106) Model Stats N 807 807 807 808 808 χ2 (9) 62.99∗∗∗ 57.76∗∗∗ 109.64∗∗∗ 28.80∗∗∗ 32.34∗∗∗ Log likelihood −1018.254 −1178.587 −1158.7183 −502.03718 −498.64819 a We also examined the impact of each treatment independently on the dependent variables in bivariate (excluding all control variables) and multivariate (including all control variables) models. The results from the multivariate analyses are essentially the same as those presented here. The bivariate models confirm our general conclusion that the personal frames are more effective than informational and motivational frames at mobilizing consensus and action on human rights issues. However, while exposure to the male or female personal frame increases respondents’ willingness to reject of the use of sleep deprivation, in the bivariate models, only the personal-male frame increases their likelihood to sign a petition to ban the practice (p < 0.05). Notes: Two-tailed tests; robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ = p < 0.05; ∗∗ = p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ = p < 0.001. common messaging techniques employed by HROs— informational, personal, and motivational frames—are more effective at fostering consensus mobilization than action mobilization. Personal narratives appear to be the most consistently successful, increasing individuals’ knowledge of and emotional reaction to the issue, and as a consequence, leading them to reject the practice and participate in a campaign to demand its cessation. Model 1 examines the effect that exposure to one of the treatments has on a participant’s agreement with the use of sleep deprivation. Results from the regression analysis (Table 4) show that compared to the control group, exposure to any of the treatments— informational, personal, or motivational—significantly decreases one’s likelihood of viewing sleep deprivation as an appropriate police interrogation technique. For example, reading a personal narrative of a male sur- vivor of sleep deprivation results in a 1.39 unit decrease in the log odds of reporting a higher level of agreement with the use of sleep deprivation. As the log odds is not always an intuitive way to interpret logit coefficients, we use them to generate predicted probabilities for hypothetical cases of interest. Table 5 depicts the predicted probabilities of how one might respond to the question of whether sleep deprivation is an appropriate interrogation technique, given their exposure to each of the treatments. The first column indicates the probabilities predicted for respondents in the control group who did not see the text of an advocacy campaign. Each subsequent column shows predicted probabilities for respondents viewing each of the treatments. We can compare, for exam- ple, the predicted probability that someone in the con- trol group will strongly disagree with that statement (0.2231) to the probability of strongly disagreeing if they viewed the informational frame (0.4010), either of the personal frames (0.5347 [male]; 0.5053 [female]) or the motivational frame (0.3085). We can make similar comparisons across each of the rows. The probability that someone in the control group will neither agree nor disagree with the use of sleep deprivation is 0.2386. The predicted probability of dis- agreeing in some manner is 0.5793 (the sum of pre- dicted probabilities for both disagreeing and strongly disagreeing), while the probability that the respon- dent will agree in some manner is 0.1821 (the sum of predicted probabilities for both agreeing and strongly agreeing). All of the treatments have measurable effects on the probability that a respondent will find sleep depriva- tion an inappropriate interrogation technique. How- ever, exposure to the personal frames has the most dramatic effect; when compared to the control group, the probability of disagreeing with the use of sleep 418 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 American Political Science Review Vol. 109, No. 3 TABLE 5. Predicted Probabilities of Responses to Question #6: “Sleep Deprivation is an Appropriate Police Interrogation Technique” Control Informational Personal (m) Personal (f) Motivational Group Frame Frame Frame Frame All Responses Strongly disagree 0.1666 0.3282 0.4502 0.4155 0.2367 0.2231 0.4010 0.5347 0.5053 0.3085 0.2795 0.4739 0.6193 0.5950 0.3803 Disagree 0.3168 0.3229 0.2644 0.2777 0.3372 0.3562 0.3615 0.3117 0.3252 0.3730 0.3956 0.4001 0.3590 0.3727 0.4088 Neutral (neither disagree nor agree) 0.1943 0.1152 0.0702 0.0749 0.1487 0.2386 0.1504 0.1009 0.1107 0.1932 0.2830 0.1855 0.1316 0.1464 0.2377 Agree 0.1048 0.0475 0.0260 0.0304 0.0701 0.1487 0.0726 0.0441 0.0493 0.1036 0.1927 0.0976 0.0623 0.0682 0.1371 Strongly agree 0.0143 0.0060 0.0033 0.0034 0.0091 0.0334 0.0146 0.0086 0.0096 0.0217 0.0525 0.0232 0.0138 0.0158 0.0343 Summary Disagree (mild or strong) 0.5793 0.7625 0.8464 0.8305 0.6815 Neutral (neither disagree nor agree) 0.2386 0.1504 0.1009 0.1107 0.1932 Agree (mild or strong) 0.1821 0.0872 0.0527 0.0589 0.1253 Notes: Dichotomous control variables held constant at their mode; all other control variables held constant at their median. Upper and lower bounds reported in italics; probabilities may not sum to 1.0 due to rounding. deprivation increases by 0.2671 if the respondent sees the personal-male frame, and by 0.2512 if the respon- dent sees the personal-female frame. When making similar comparisons, the probability of disagreeing with the use of sleep deprivation increases by only 0.1832 if the respondent sees the informational frame, and 0.1022 if the respondent sees the motivational frame. Although all of the frames have a statistically signifi- cant effect on respondents’ opinions that sleep depri- vation is inappropriate (Table 4), the magnitude of the impact of personal frames on consensus mobilization is greatest (Table 5). That the various treatments had differential effects on the dependent variable (H10) is confirmed through a series of Wald tests (Long and Freese 2006; Williams 2014).14 In fact, only the effects of the personal-male and personal-female treatments were indistinguishable from one another. As an illus- trative example, Figure 4 graphs the predicted prob- ability of an individual strongly disagreeing with the statement “Sleep deprivation is an appropriate police interrogation technique.” We can see that respondents who view one of the treatments are more likely to find sleep deprivation inappropriate than are those who view no treatment. In addition, both personal frames are more likely to lead to consensus mobiliza- tion than the motivational frame, and somewhat less conclusively, the informational frame. Finally, there is 14 The relevant Wald test statistics are Informational = Personal- Male (χ2 = 6.99, p < 0.01); Informational = PersonalFemale (χ2 = 4.70, p < 0.05); Informational = Motivational (χ2 = 3.71; p < 0.10); PersonalMale = PersonalFemale (χ2 = 0.18, p = 0.67); Personal- Male = Motivational (χ2 = 18.74, p < 0.001); PersonalFemale = Motivational (χ2 = 14.98, p < 0.001). no significant difference in the impact between the personal-male and personal-female frames. Models 2–5 in Table 4 examine the effect that expo- sure to one of the treatments has on a participant’s self- reported and observed willingness to mobilize around the issue of sleep deprivation. With one exception, par- ticipants who viewed any of the treatments were more likely than those who did not to report that they would both support and participate in a campaign to ban sleep deprivation (Models 2 and 3).15 However, when asked to actually take action by signing a petition to be sent to the Attorney General or the UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights, only those exposed to the personal frames were more likely to do so. Neither the informa- tional nor the motivational frames had a statistically significant effect on participants’ actual choices to act or not (Models 4 and 5). Given the relatively low risk and low cost request (“If you would like to add your name to a petition to be sent to . . . , demanding the immediate end to the use of sleep deprivation during police interrogation, please click YES below”), we are not optimistic about the prospects of either the infor- mational, or somewhat more unexpectedly, the moti- vational frames on their own to mobilize individuals around an issue area. Tables 6 and 7 investigate the magnitude of the ef- fects of these treatments on action mobilization. The difference in predicted probabilities of agreeing to add one’s name to a petition to be sent to the Attorney Gen- eral (Table 6) or the UN Special Rapporteur (Table 7) 15 Respondents who viewed the motivational frame were not more likely than the control group to say that they would support a cam- paign to ban sleep deprivation. 419 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change August 2015 TABLE 6. Predicted Probabilities of Responses to Whether Respondent Would Like Their Name Added to a Petition to Be Sent to the Attorney General Control Informational Personal (m) Personal (f) Motivational Response Group Frame Frame Frame Frame Yes 0.1688 0.2263 0.2952 0.2645 0.2315 0.2392 0.3105 0.3789 0.3530 0.3150 0.3096 0.3947 0.4626 0.4415 0.3986 No 0.6904 0.6053 0.5374 0.5585 0.6014 0.7608 0.6895 0.6211 0.6470 0.6850 0.8312 0.7737 0.7048 0.7355 0.7685 Notes: Dichotomous control variables held constant at their mode; all other control variables held constant at their median. Upper and lower bounds reported in italics; probabilities may not sum to 1.0 due to rounding. TABLE 7. Predicted Probabilities of Responses to Whether Respondent Would Like Their Name Added to a Petition to Be Sent to the United National Special Rapporteur for Human Rights Control Informational Personal (m) Personal (f) Motivational Response Group Frame Frame Frame Frame Yes 0.1754 0.2312 0.2927 0.2745 0.2157 0.2468 0.3148 0.3766 0.3641 0.2981 0.3182 0.3983 0.4605 0.4537 0.3805 No 0.6818 0.6017 0.5395 0.5463 0.6195 0.7532 0.6852 0.6234 0.6359 0.7019 0.8246 0.7688 0.7073 0.7255 0.7843 Notes: Dichotomous control variables held constant at their mode; all other control variables held constant at their median. Upper and lower bounds reported in italics; probabilities may not sum to 1.0 due to rounding. FIGURE 4. Predicted Probability with 95% CI of Responding “Strongly Disagree” to Question #6: “Sleep Deprivation is an Appropriate Police Interrogation Technique,” by Treatment Group is minimal when comparing the control group to either the informational (0.0623 and 0.0680) or motivational (0.0758 and 0.0513) frames. However, when compared to the control group, the probability of being willing to add one’s name to the UN petition increases by 0.1298 if the respondent sees the personal-male frame, and by 0.1173 if the respondent sees the personal-female frame. A similar effect is seen when examining the predicted probabilities for adding one’s name to the Attorney General petition. While it appears that the 420 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 American Political Science Review Vol. 109, No. 3 personal frames have the strongest effect on action mobilization, given the significant overlap in the confi- dence intervals, and the Wald test statistics,16 we cannot reject the null hypothesis that there is no difference in the treatments’ impacts on the dependent variable (H11). Table 8 displays the results from Models 6–10, which test the proposed mechanisms driving participants’ be- liefs and behavior regarding sleep deprivation. Results show that the informational frame is the only messag- ing strategy that has a consistent impact on individuals’ knowledge of the issue. With its emphasis on “objec- tive” facts and statistics, it is not surprising that the informational frame increases participants’ perceived and real knowledge of sleep deprivation, including its negative impact on victims/survivors and its overall ef- ficacy as an interrogation technique. In comparison, neither the personal nor the motivational frames left participants feeling more informed, even though both framing strategies increased individuals’ likelihood of correctly identifying sleep deprivation as deleterious for victims. The personal-male frame further led par- ticipants to correctly identify sleep deprivation as an ineffective interrogation tool. Where informational frames attempt to change peo- ple’s minds and behavior through education, personal frames do so by appealing to their base emotions. The results presented in Models 11–14 in Table 8 demon- strate that personal frames do, in fact, elicit emotional responses from viewers. Individuals exposed to per- sonal narratives of suffering are more likely than those who are not to feel “bad” or “very bad” when think- ing about sleep deprivation, feelings that were driven mostly by their understanding of the suffering it caused to victims. Finally, motivational frames attempt to affect peo- ples’ sense of agency and the likelihood that their ac- tions are effective in bringing about change. We saw in Tables 4, 6, and 7 above that while motivational frames change minds, they do not on their own make individuals more likely to act. The results presented in Model 15 in Table 9 may help to explain why. In this model, we remove agency as a control variable and instead make it the dependent variable. We find that none of the frames, motivational frames included, have an effect on respondents’ sense of personal effi- cacy and agency. A sense of agency plays a role in the processes of consensus and action mobilization, but itself is not affected by exposure to any one particular frame, even one that specifically targets that sense of agency. 16 The relevant Wald test statistics for signing a petition to the UN Special Representative are Informational = PersonalMale (χ2 = 1.35, p = 0.2449); Informational = PersonalFemale (χ2 = 0.84, p = 0.3590); Informational = Motivational (χ2 = 0.10; p = 0.7510); PersonalMale = PersonalFemale (χ2 = 0.05, p = 0.8181); Personal- Male = Motivational (χ2 = 2.17, p = 0.1412); PersonalFemale = Motivational (χ2 = 1.49, p = 0.2221). The Wald test results are not substantively different if we look at those who are willing to sign a petition to the Attorney General, or those who were willing to sign either petition. CONCLUSION This study provides the first systematic test of the efficacy of the three most common framing tech- niques employed by large, Western, global HROs— informational, personal, and motivational frames. Our results demonstrate that these frames are more effec- tive at fostering consensus mobilization than they are at action mobilization. Personal narratives appear to be the most consistently successful, increasing individuals’ knowledge on the issue, their emotional reaction to the issue, and as a consequence, leading them to reject the practice and participate in a campaign to demand its cessation. This study also demonstrated that there are clear systematic differences in how individuals respond to the ways in which information about human rights abuses are presented. HROs’ efforts to affect individ- uals’ attitudes or behavior on human rights issues are not uniformly successful, but rather depend greatly on the messaging strategy employed. To the extent that these micromobilization efforts—consensus and action mobilization—are critical to their ability to influence state or perpetrator behavior, the results of our study would suggest that HROs should emphasize personal narratives that provoke empathy and other emotional reactions from the target audience. Stirring emotions of empathy, sadness, and even anger appear more ef- fective than simple issue education or motivational ap- peals at encouraging individuals to see sleep depriva- tion as a human rights violation and to participate in a movement to ban its practice. Given the dearth of empirical research examining the efficacy of framing in HRO campaigns, this field is ripe with future research opportunities. One such opportunity concerns the use of simultaneous frames. This study demonstrated the impact of each framing strategy in isolation. While significant in its own right (we now know that the use of a personal narrative alone is sufficient to mobilize consensus and action on a human rights issue), the reality is that HROs rarely employ these frames separately. Do some combina- tion of frames work better than others? Is the success of one type of frame contingent upon its use in con- junction with another? Do some frames mitigate the effectiveness of others? Future analysis is required to construct more complex, multiframe campaigns and examine how these interactions impact consensus and action mobilization. We hope this study moves scholars to ask other ques- tions that would enhance our understanding of how and under what conditions HROs can change behavior. Our study focuses on the types of campaigns commonly used by large, global HROs that target a more edu- cated, Western audience. Future research should ex- amine the ways in which local HROs, cultural contexts, and audiences change the choice of framing strategies or the efficacy of these frames. For example, our study focused on the mobilization of a relatively educated audience (mean = “technical or associate graduate”) from the global North. While respondents’ education was not a significant predictor of consensus or action 421 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change August 2015 TABLE 8. Ordered Logit Results, Models 6–10 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 Reported Reported Reported Observed Observed Knowledge, Knowledge, Knowledge, Knowledge, Knowledge, General Consequences Efficacy Consequences Efficacy Treatments Informational 0.952∗∗∗ 0.801∗∗∗ 1.39∗∗∗ 0.650∗∗ 0.596∗∗ (0.182) (0.204) (0.195) (0.214) (0.181) Personal (m) 0.014 0.168 0.353 1.088∗∗∗ 0.394∗ (0.201) (0.208) (0.195) (0.202) (0.187) Personal (f) − 0.214 − 0.075 0.165 1.126∗∗∗ 0.168 (0.208) (0.203) (0.207) (0.215) (0.217) Motivational − 0.126 − 0.004 0.049 0.558∗∗ − 0.065 (0.195) (0.217) (0.201) (0.204) (0.155) Controls Age − 0.004 − 0.017∗∗ − 0.010 − 0.019∗∗ − 0.008 (0.006) (0.007) (0.006) (0.006) (0.005) Gender 0.235 0.004 0.212 − 0.168 − 0.075 (0.138) (0.137) (0.135) (0.137) (0.132) Education 0.020 − 0.012 − 0.001 − 0.002 0.047 (0.051) (0.055) (0.053) (0.050) (0.051) News 0.195∗∗ 0.186∗∗ 0.246∗∗∗ 0.064 − 0.058 (0.067) (0.064) (0.067) (0.062) (0.059) Agency 0.530∗∗∗ 0.414∗∗∗ 0.555∗∗∗ 0.240∗ 0.202∗ (0.097) (0.097) (0.093) (0.093) (0.084) Model Stats N 803 808 807 805 806 χ2 (9) 98.29∗∗∗ 52.94∗∗∗ 111.78∗∗∗ 57.33∗∗∗ 26.22∗∗ Log likelihood −1092.2438 −1063.3262 −1089.3975 −1001.2184 −1240.9505 Notes: Two-tailed tests; robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ = p < 0.05; ∗∗ = p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ = p < 0.001. TABLE 9. Ordered Logit Results, Models 11–15 Model 11 Model 12 Model 13 Model 14 Model 15 Emotional Emotional Emotional Emotional Agency and Response, Response, Response, Response, Personal General Type Consequences Efficacy Efficacy Treatments Informational 0.297 − 0.381 0.765∗∗∗ 0.791∗∗∗ − 0.085 (0.210) (0.211) (0.207) (0.192) (0.202) Personal (m) 1.009∗∗∗ − 1.281∗∗∗ 0.952∗∗∗ 0.625∗∗ − 0.065 (0.213) (0.213) (0.194) (0.206) (0.214) Personal (f) 1.009∗∗∗ − 1.242∗∗∗ 0.979∗∗∗ 0.350 0.062 (0.216) (0.222) (0.220) (0.206) (0.206) Motivational 0.167 − 0.206 0.423∗ 0.332 0.151 (0.210) (0.213) (0.206) (0.206) (0.219) Controls Age 0.015∗ 0.003 − 0.014∗ − 0.009 − 0.007 (0.007) (0.006) (0.006) (0.006) (0.007) Gender − 0.226 0.213 0.026 − 0.209 − 0.211 (0.143) (0.144) (0.143) (0.134) (0.142) Education − 0.004 0.022 0.039 0.087 0.064 (0.051) (0.053) (0.049) (0.051) (0.054) News 0.147∗ − 0.122 0.148∗ 0.068 0.422∗∗∗ (0.065) (0.065) (0.064) (0.062) (0.066) Agency 0.489∗∗∗ − 0.020 0.066 0.201∗ (0.095) (0.099) (0.090) (0.091) Model Stats N 807 807 805 807 808 χ2 (9) 85.70∗∗∗ 71.05∗∗∗ 44.54∗∗∗ 37.39∗∗∗ χ2 (8) = 47.17∗∗∗ Log likelihood −930.8119 −911.6029 −1052.1542 −1105.8181 −882.1756 Notes: Two-tailed tests; robust standard errors in parentheses; ∗ = p < 0.05; ∗∗ = p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ = p < 0.001. 422 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 American Political Science Review Vol. 109, No. 3 mobilization, further analysis is required to determine if HRO campaigns targeting a less educated population employ the same framing strategies, and, if so, whether they have the same effect. In some contexts, for exam- ple, where information on rights and rights abuses is limited, campaigns with an informational lens may be essential to shaping individuals’ attitudes and behavior. In addition, future studies should consider whether some framing strategies work better to mobilize con- sensus and action around some human rights issues (such as sleep deprivation) but not others (such as dis- appearances), or on behalf of some types of victims (such as those perceived as vulnerable, innocent, or apolitical) but not others (such as those who may be guilty of a crime, are political dissidents, or may be perceived as less vulnerable). And do consensus and action mobilization actually convince states or IOs to shame or sanction perpetrators, or otherwise affect per- petrator behavior? This study suggests that rather than assuming microlevel processes we should begin to ex- plicitly test these relationships and further specify the relationship between HRO advocacy on human rights issues and actual changes in human rights conditions. Finally, our study suggests that scholars and prac- titioners of citizen engagement and activism more broadly should explicitly examine the effects of framing strategies on consensus and action mobilization. For example, one might expect that the framing strategies that build consensus around issues of human rights will differ from those that mobilize consensus around en- vironmental issues, which might rely less on personal narratives and empathy and more on providing infor- mation about environmental impacts. Similarly, get out the vote campaigns that are tied to specific rights re- lated issues (such as marriage equality) might be better served with the use of a personal frame that builds con- nection and empathy. Still other issues might be best addressed using a framing strategy not identified here, such as a moral or religious frame. Future research would benefit from analyzing framing effects across a range of activists’ issues to better understand how and under what circumstances framing changes minds and mobilizes people to engage in political processes. APPENDIX A: SURVEY 1. I feel knowledgeable about the use of sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique. Strongly Agree / Agree / Neither Agree nor Disagree / Dis- agree / Strongly Disagree 2. Depriving an individual of sleep during interrogation is an ineffective way to gain reliable information. Strongly Agree / Agree / Neither Agree nor Disagree / Dis- agree / Strongly Disagree 3. I feel knowledgeable about the consequences of sleep de- privation on individuals who have experienced it. Strongly Agree / Agree / Neither Agree nor Disagree / Dis- agree / Strongly Disagree 4. Depriving an individual of sleep during interrogation has a negative impact on their long-term mental and physical wellbeing. Strongly Agree / Agree / Neither Agree nor Disagree / Dis- agree / Strongly Disagree 5. I feel knowledgeable about the effectiveness of sleep de- privation as a police interrogation technique. Strongly Agree / Agree / Neither Agree nor Disagree / Dis- agree / Strongly Disagree 6. Sleep deprivation is an appropriate police interrogation technique. Strongly Agree / Agree / Neither Agree nor Disagree / Dis- agree / Strongly Disagree 7. How much of an emotional reaction do you experience when thinking about the use of sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique? A lot / Some / Little / None 8. How do you feel when thinking about the use of sleep deprivation? Very Good / Good / Neither Good nor Bad / Bad / Very Bad 9. My feelings about sleep deprivation as a police interro- gation technique are at least partly because of its conse- quences for individuals who have experienced it. Strongly Agree / Agree / Neither Agree nor Disagree / Dis- agree / Strongly Disagree 10. My feelings about sleep deprivation as a police interroga- tion technique are at least partly because of how effective or ineffective it is. Strongly Agree / Agree / Neither Agree nor Disagree / Dis- agree / Strongly Disagree 11. How likely are you to participate in a campaign to ban sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique? Very Likely / Likely / Neither Likely nor Unlikely / Unlikely / Very Unlikely 12. How likely are you to support a campaign to ban sleep deprivation as a police interrogation technique? Very Likely / Likely / Neither Likely nor Unlikely / Unlikely / Very Unlikely 13. What is your age in years? 14. Which of the following best describes your gender? Male / Female / Transgender / Other (please indicate below) 15. What is the highest level of education that you have com- pleted? Some high school / High school graduate / Some technical school or college / Technical school or associate gradu- ate / College degree (example: BS, BA) / Graduate degree (example: MA, MS, PhD, EdD)/ Professional degree (ex- ample: MD, DDS, DVM) 16. How often do you follow world news? Never / Rarely / Several Times a Month / Once a Week / Daily 17. How much influence do you think you can have in shaping public policy? A lot / Some / Little / None 18. If you would like to add your name to a petition to be sent to the Attorney General, demanding the immediate end to the use of sleep deprivation during police interrogations, please click YES. Yes / No 19. If you would like to add your name to a petition to be sent to the United Nations Special Rapporteur for Human Rights, demanding the immediate end to the use of sleep deprivation during police interrogations, please click YES. Yes / No 423 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change August 2015 APPENDIX B: Descriptive statistics Variables Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max. Dependent Variables Appropriate? 1.970 1.024 1 5 Reported support 3.436 1.169 1 5 Reported participation 2.895 1.136 1 5 AG petition 0.337 0.473 0 1 UN petition 0.335 0.472 0 1 Intervening Variables Reported knowledge, general 2.988 1.109 1 5 Reported knowledge, consequences 3.347 1.054 1 5 Reported knowledge, efficacy 2.976 1.075 1 5 Observed knowledge, consequences 3.347 1.054 1 5 Observed knowledge, efficacy 3.948 0.932 1 5 Emotional Response, general 2.918 0.846 1 4 Emotional Response, type 1.968 0.816 1 5 Emotional Response, consequences 3.632 1.001 1 5 Emotional Response, efficacy 3.453 1.036 1 5 Treatment Groups Control group 0.203 0.403 0 1 Informational 0.200 0.400 0 1 Personal (m) 0.205 0.404 0 1 Personal (f) 0.197 0.398 0 1 Motivational 0.195 0.396 0 1 Control Variables Age (years) 32.306 11.479 18 76 Gender 0.556 0.497 0 1 Education 4.127 1.298 1 7 News 3.955 1.105 1 5 Agency 2.190 0.751 1 4 REFERENCES Anonymous. Personal interview. October 23, 2013. Wooster, Ohio. Ausderan, Jacob. 2014. “How Naming and Shaming Affects Human Rights Perceptions in the Shamed Country” Journal of Peace Re- search 51 (1): 81–95. Becker, Jo. 2012. Campaigning for Justice: Human Rights Advocacy in Practice. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Benenson, Peter. 1961. “The Forgotten Prisoners.” The Observer, May 28, p. 21. Benford, Robert D., and David A. Snow. 2000. “Framing Processes and Social Movements: An Overview and Assessment.” Annual Review of Sociology 26: 611–39. Berinsky, Adam J., Gregory A. Huber, and Gabriel S. Lenz. 2012. “Evaluating Online Labor Markets for Experimental Research: Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk.” Political Analysis 20: 351–68. Blagrove, Mark. 1996. “Effects of Length of Sleep Deprivation on Interrogative Suggestibility.” Journal of Experimental Psychology 2 (1): 48–59. Bob, Clifford. 2005. The Marketing of Rebellion: Insurgents, Media, and International Activism. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer- sity Press. Brewer, Paul R. 2002. “Framing, Value Words, and Citizens’ Expla- nations of Their Issue Opinions.” Political Communication 19 (3): 303–16. Brysk, Alison. 1993. “From Above and Below Social Movements, the International System, and Human Rights in Argentina.” Compar- ative Political Studies 26 (3): 259–85. Brysk, Alison. 2013. Speaking Rights to Power: Constructing Political Will. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Buhrmester, Michael, Tracy Kwang, and Samuel D. Gosling. 2011. “Amazon’s Mechanical Turk A New Source of Inexpensive, Yet High-Quality, Data?” Perspectives on Psychological Science 6 (1): 3–5. Carpenter, R. Charli. 2005. “‘Women, Children and Other Vulner- able Groups’: Gender, Strategic Frames and the Protection of Civilians as a Transnational Issue.” International Studies Quarterly 49 (2): 295–334. Chong, Dennis, and James N. Druckman. 2007. “Framing Theory.” Annual Review of Political Science 10: 103–26. Clark, Ann Marie. 2001. Diplomacy of Conscience: Amnesty Inter- national and Changing Human Right Norms. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Cohrs, J. Christopher, Jürgen Maes, Barbara Moschner, and Sven Kielmann. 2007. “Determinants of Human Rights Attitudes and Behavior: A Comparison and Integration of Psychological Perspectives.” Political Psychology 28 (4): 441–69. Davis, David R., Amanda Murdie, and Coty Garnett Steinmetz. 2012. “‘Makers and Shapers’: Human Rights INGOs and Public Opinion.” Human Rights Quarterly 34 (1): 199–224. Domke, David, Dhavan V. Shah, and Daniel B. Wackman. 1998. “Media Priming Effects: Accessibility, Association, and Activa- tion.” International Journal of Public Opinion Research 10 (1): 51–74. Druckman, James N. 2001. “On the Limits of Framing Effects: Who Can Frame?” The Journal of Politics 63 (4): 1041–66. Duffy, John, and Margit Tavits. 2008. “Beliefs and Voting Decisions: A Test of the Pivotal Voter Model.” American Journal of Political Science 52 (3): 603–18. Edlin, Aaron, Andrew Gelman, and Noah Kaplan. 2007. “Voting as a Rational Choice: Why and How People Vote to Improve the Well-Being of Others.” Rationality and Society 19 (3): 293–314. Elliott, Kimberly Ann, and Richard B. Freeman. 2003. Can Labor Standards Improve Under Globalization? Washington, DC: Insti- tute for International Economics. Gamson, William A. 1995. “Constructing Social Protest.” In Social Movements and Culture, eds. Hank Johnston and Bert Klander- mans. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 85–106. Goffman, Erving. 1974. Frame Analysis. New York: Harper & Row. Green, Donald P., Alan S. Gerber, and David W. Nickerson. 2003. “The Challenge of Bringing Voter Mobilization ‘To Scale’: An Evaluation of Youth Vote’s 2002 Phone Banking Campaigns.” Typescript. Yale University, Institution for Social and Policy Stud- ies. Gronke, Paul, Darius Rejali, Dustin Drengis, James Hicks, Peter Miller, and Bryan Nakayama. 2010. “U.S. Public Opinion 424 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 American Political Science Review Vol. 109, No. 3 on Torture, 2001–2009.” PS: Political Science and Politics 43 (3): 437–44. Hafner-Burton, Emilie M. 2008. “Sticks and Stones: Naming and Shaming the Human Rights Enforcement Problem.” International Organization 62 (4): 689–716. Harlow, Summer. 2012. “Social Media and Social Movements: Face- book and an Online Guatemalan Justice Movement that Moved Offline.” New Media & Society 14 (2): 225–43. Haspel, Moshe, and H. Gibbs Knotts. 2005. “Location, Location, Lo- cation: Precinct Placement and the Costs of Voting.” The Journal of Politics 67 (2): 560–73. Hendrix, Cullen S., and Wendy H. Wong. 2013. “When Is the Pen Truly Mighty? Regime Type and the Efficacy of Naming and Shaming in Curbing Human Rights Abuses.” British Journal of Political Science 43: 651–72. Hertel, Shareen. 2006. Unexpected Power: Conflict and Change Among Transnational Activists. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Hiscox, Michael J. 2006. “Through a Glass and Darkly: Attitudes toward International Trade and the Curious Effects of Issue Fram- ing.” International Organization 60 (3): 755–80. Hunt, Lynn. 2007. Inventing Human Rights: A History. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. Iyengar, Shanto. 1991. Is Anyone Responsible? How Television Frames Political Issues. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk.” Econometrica 47 (2): 263–91. Kahn-Greene, Ellen T., Killgore, Desiree B., Kamimori, Gary H., Balkin, Thomas J., and William D. S. Killgore. 2007. “The Effects of Sleep Deprivation on Symptoms of Psychopathology in Healthy Adults.” Sleep Medicine 8 (3): 215–21. Keck, Margaret E., and Kathryn Sikkink. 1998. Activists Beyond Borders: Advocacy Networks in International Politics. New York: Cornell University Press. Keck, Margaret E., and Kathryn Sikkink. 1999. “Transnational Ad- vocacy Networks in International and Regional Politics.” Interna- tional Social Science Journal 51 (159): 89–101. Kim, Ji won, Yonghwan Kim, and Joseph Jai-sung Yoo. 2014. “The Public As Active Agents in Social Movement: Facebook and Gangjeong Movement.” Computers in Human Behavior 37: 144– 51. Klandermans, Bert. 1984. “Mobilization and Participation: Social- psychological Expansions of Resource Mobilization Theory.” American Sociological Review 49 (5): 583–600. Klandermans, Bert. 1988. “The Formation and Mobilization of Con- sensus.” In B. Klandermans, H. Kriesi, and S. Tarrow (Eds.), Inter- national Social Movement Research. Vol. 1. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 173–96. Kogut, Tehila, and Ilana Ritov. 2005. “The “Identified Victim” Ef- fect: An Identified Group, or Just a Single Individual?” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 18 (3): 157–67. Krain, Matthew. 2012. “J’accuse! Does Naming and Shaming Perpe- trators Reduce the Severity of Genocides or Politicides?” Interna- tional Studies Quarterly 56 (3): 574–89. Ladner, Andreas, and Joëlle Pianzola. 2010. “Do Voting Advice Ap- plications Have an Effect on Electoral Participation and Voter Turnout? Evidence from the 2007 Swiss Federal Elections,” in Electronic Participation. Edited by E. Tambouris, A. Macintosh, and O. Glassey. Berlin: Springer, 211–24. Larcinese, Valentino. 2007. “Does Political Knowledge Increase Turnout? Evidence from the 1997 British General Election.” Pub- lic Choice 131: 387–411. Long, J. Scott, and Jeremy Freese. 2006. Regression Models for Cat- egorical Dependent Variables using Stata. College Station: Stata Press. Mason, Winter, and Siddharth Suri. 2012. “Conducting Behavioral Research on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.” Behavior Research Methods 44 (1): 1–23. Meyerowitz, Beth E., and Shelly Chaiken 1987. “The Effect of Mes- sage Framing on Breast Self-Examination Attitudes, Intentions, and Behavior.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 52 (3): 500–10. Monroe, Kristen Renwick. 1996. The Heart of Altruism: Perceptions of a Common Humanity. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Murdie, Amanda. 2009. “The Impact of Human Rights NGO Ac- tivity on Human Rights Practices.” International NGO Journal 4 (10): 421–40. Murdie, Amanda, and Tavishi Bhasin. 2011. “Aiding and Abetting? Human Rights INGOs and Domestic Anti-Government Protest.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 55 (2): 163–91. Nagengast, Carole [Amnesty International]. Personal interview via Skype. November 5, 2013. Nelson, Thomas E., Rosalee A. Clawson, and Zoe M. Oxley. 1997. “Media Framing of a Civil Liberties Conflict and Its Effect on Tolerance.” American Political Science Review 91 (3): 567–83. Nelson, Thomas E., and Zoe M. Oxley. 1999. “Issue Framing Effects on Belief Importance and Opinion.” Journal of Politics 61 (4): 1040–67. O’Keefe, Bill [Catholic Relief Services]. Personal interview via tele- phone. October 30, 2013. Paolacci, Gabriele, Jesse Chandler, and Panagiotis Ipeirotis. 2010. “Running Experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk.” Judgment and Decision Making 5 (5): 411–9. Peksen, Dursun. 2009. “Better or Worse? The Effect of Economic Sanctions on Human Rights.” Journal of Peace Research 46 (1): 59–77. Peksen, Dursun. 2012. “Does Foreign Military Intervention Help Human Rights?” Political Research Quarterly 65 (3): 558–71. Pilcher, June J., and Allen I. Huffcutt. 1996. “Effects of Sleep Depri- vation on Performance: a Meta-Analysis.” Sleep Medicine 19 (4): 318–26. Rand, David G. 2012. “The Promise of Mechanical Turk: How Online Labor Markets Can Help Theorists Run Behavioral Experiments.” Journal of Theoretical Biology 299: 172–9. Richards, David L., Mandy M. Morrill, and Mary R. Anderson. 2012. “Some Psycho-Social Correlates of US Citizen Support for Tor- ture.” Nordic Journal of Human Rights 30 (1): 63–95. Riker, William H., and Peter C. Ordeshook. 1968. “A Theory of the Calculus of Voting.” American Political Science Review 62 (1): 25–42. Scheufele, Dietram A. 1999. “Framing as a Theory of Media Effects.” Journal of Communication 49 (1): 103–22. Shen, Fuyuan. 2004. “Chronic Accessibility and Individual Cogni- tions: Examining the Effects of Message Frames in Political Ad- vertisements.” Journal of Communication 54 (1): 123–37. Sigelman, Lee, and William D. Berry. 1982. “Cost and the Calculus of Voting.” Political Behavior 4 (4): 419–28. Small, Deborah A., and George Loewenstein. 2003. “Helping a Vic- tim or Helping the Victim: Altruism and Identifiability.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 26 (1): 5–16. Small, Deborah A., George Loewenstein, and Paul Slovic. 2007. “Sympathy and Callousness: The Impact of Deliberative Thought on Donations to Identifiable and Statistical Victims.” Organiza- tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes 102 (2): 143–53. Snow, David A., and Robert D. Benford. 1992. “Master Frames and Cycles of Protest.” In Aldon D. Morris and Carol McClurg- Mueller, eds. Frontiers in Social Movement Theory. New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 133–55. Snow, David A., E. Burke Rochford, Jr., Steven K. Worden, and Robert D. Benford. 1986. “Frame Alignment Processes, Micromo- bilization and Movement Participation.” American Sociological Review 51 (4): 464–81. Stellmacher, Jost, Gert Sommer, and Elmar Brähler. 2005. “The Cog- nitive Representation of Human Rights: Knowledge, Importance, and Commitment.” Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychol- ogy 11: 267–92. Valdez, Patricia, and Albert Mehrabian. 1994. “Effects of Color on Emotions.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 123 (4): 394–409. Valkenburg, Patti M., Holli A. Semetko, and Claes H. De Vreese. 1999. “The Effects of News Frames on Readers’ Thoughts and Recall.” Communication Research 26: 550–69. Warkentin, Craig, and Karen Mingst. 2000. “International Institu- tions, the State, and Global Civil Society in the Age of the World Wide Web.” Global Governance 6 (2): 237–57. Welch, Claude E., Jr. 1995. Protecting Human Rights in Africa: Roles and Strategies of Non-Governmental Organizations. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. 425 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95 Human Rights Organizations as Agents of Change August 2015 Williams, Richard. 2014. “Imposing and Testing Equality Constraints in Models.” https://www3.nd.edu/∼rwilliam/stats2/ l42.pdf (last accessed 11.01.14). Wong, Wendy H. 2012. Internal Affairs: How the Structure of NGOs Transforms Human Rights. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Wood, Reed M. 2008. “A Hand upon the Throat of the Nation”: Eco- nomic Sanctions and State Repression, 1976–2001.” International Studies Quarterly 52 (4): 489–513. Zillmann, Dolf. 1999. “Exemplification Theory: Judging the Whole by Some of its Parts.” Media Psychology 1 (1): 69–94. 426 D ow nl oa de d fr om h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e. U ni ve rs ity o f M el bo ur ne L ib ra ry , o n 29 Ju l 2 01 9 at 1 9: 55 :4 5, s ub je ct to th e Ca m br id ge C or e te rm s of u se , a va ila bl e at h tt ps :// w w w .c am br id ge .o rg /c or e/ te rm s. h tt ps :// do i.o rg /1 0. 10 17 /S 00 03 05 54 15 00 02 95