Pais_AmJournSocio_2013_2Ypg.pdf
aw6w9QbMAjE.Y_NBbXxtLPz7KfbK-Pais_AmJournSocio_2013_2Ypg.pdf.plain.html

The Effects of U.S. Immigration on the Career Trajectories of Native Workers, 1979–20041 Jeremy Pais University of Connecticut While earlier work primarily examines the point-in-time effects of im- migration on the earnings of native workers, this article focuses more broadly on the effects of immigration on native workers’ career tra- jectories. Cross-classified multilevel growth-curve models are applied to 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and U.S. Census Bu- reau data to demonstrate how people adjust to changing local labor market conditions throughout their careers. The key findings indicate that substitution and complementary effects depend on the stage of the worker’s career. At entry into the labor market, high levels of im- migration have a positive effect on the career paths of young native- born adults. However, negative contemporaneous effects to natives’ earnings tend to offset positive point-of-entry effects, a finding that suggests job competition among natives is greater in areas of high im- migrant population concentration. These results raise questions about whether foreign-born workers need to be in direct competition with natives for there to be substitution effects. INTRODUCTION The effect of immigration on the socioeconomic attainments of native work- ers is a contentious issue that is often studied within the substitution/com- 1 Thanks to all the AJS reviewers for their comments and suggestions. I also thank Scott South, Nancy Denton, and Larry Raffalovich for their helpful comments on previous versions of this manuscript. This research was supported by a National Science Foun- dation grant ðSES-0926235Þ. Any errors are my responsibility. Direct correspondence to Jeremy Pais, Department of Sociology, University of Connecticut, 344 Mansfield Road, Unit 2068, Storrs, Connecticut 06269. Email: jeremy.pais@uconn.edu AJS Volume 119 Number 1 (July 2013): 35–74 35 © 2013 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0002-9602/2013/119-0002$10.00 plement framework ðe.g., Grossman 1982; Borjas 1983, 1987, 1999; Abowd and Freeman 1991; Card 1990, 2001, 2005; Butcher and Card 1991; Wal- dinger 1996, 1997; Smith andEdmonston 1997;Waldinger andLichter 2003; Pedace 2006Þ. The substitution/complement framework maintains that in- creasing numbers of foreign-born workers can have negative or positive ef- fects on the economic opportunities for natives. If increasing numbers of immigrants directly compete for the same jobs as native workers, but im- migrants are recognized by the employers as more efficient, suitable, and productive substitutes for natives, then the labor market outcomes for na- tive workers are expected to be negative. On the other hand, if immigrants are creating additional jobs in the economy ðe.g., Light andRosenstein 1995; Linton 2002; Ottaviano and Peri 2006Þ or taking jobs that are deemed un- desirable by native workers ðPiore 1979Þ, then the labor market outcomes for native workers can be minimal or even positive. Under this condition, the im- migrant workforce is said to complement the existing native workforce. Despite the seemingly straightforward empirical nature of the question posed by the substitution/complement framework, reaching a consensus among researchers has been difficult. Recent immigration effects research tends to report a modest negative effect of immigrant population concen- tration on earnings for less educated native workers ðe.g., Reed and Dan- ziger 2007Þ, but there exists evidence of complementary effects as well ðe.g., Muller 1993, p. 173; Enchautegui 1995; Reimers 1998, p. 142Þ. Many re- searchers recognize that the measurable economic impact of immigration is seemingly much smaller than what is anticipated by the dictates of sup- ply and demand ðWaldinger and Lichter 2003; Card 2005; Reed and Dan- ziger 2007Þ. Most recognize that the anticipated substitution effect of lower wages among native workers tends to be small and difficult to confirm be- cause workers are mobile and labor markets are flexible. Addressing this issue continues to be a serious challenge because researchers focus exten- sively on the contemporaneous effects of immigration—that is, researchers tend to rely on cross-sectional local labor market data to estimate the point- in-time effects of immigrant population concentration on native worker em- ployment outcomes. There is an obvious and immediate problem with this point-in-time ap- proach. Trying to assess the impact of immigration is hindered by the fact that native workers may respond to foreign-born competition by finding work in another industry, by taking up another occupation, or by moving to another local labor market altogether ðSmith and Edmonston 1997, pp. 225–30; Borjas 1999, pp. 73–82Þ. It is nowwidely recognized that this un- observed selectivity among the population—that is, unmeasured individual- level behaviors or attributes that are associated with local labor market characteristics and employment outcomes—will bias the observed impact of immigration because those native workers who are most likely to compete American Journal of Sociology 36 with immigrants are also the ones most likely to change their behavior to avoid competition. Rarely, however, is the extent of bias in immigration research ever rigorously evaluated. Consequently, we still do not fully un- derstand how immigration affects local labor market outcomes among na- tive workers. This research takes a novel life course approach to address this chal- lenge. Drawing on 25 years of longitudinal data, this research studies the effects of immigrant population concentration on workers’ career trajec- tories ðas opposed to a strict focus on contemporaneous effectsÞ.2 By ob- serving individuals over the life course as they are exposed to different local levels of immigrant population concentration, this research incorpo- rates individual-level adaptations to immigration that are unaccounted for in previous research. This has important implications for our under- standing of how local labor markets operate during an era of increasing immigration and for our empirical assessment of substitution or comple- mentary effects that result. This career trajectory perspective is an impor- tant advancement in the area of immigration effects research. CONTEXTUAL EFFECTS AND CAREER TRAJECTORIES This research incorporates insights from intra- and intergenerational mo- bility research to develop an account of how immigrant population con- centration affects people’s career trajectories. Previous research on the de- terminants of social mobility over the life course have focused primarily on individual- and family-level characteristics ðe.g., Blau and Duncan 1967; Sørensen 1975; Spilerman 1977; Rosenfeld 1980; Halaby 2003Þ. This study considers, in addition to these characteristics, how contextual factors affect patterns of intragenerational socioeconomic mobility. In The American Occupational Structure, Blau and Duncan ð1967Þ posit three main determinants of socioeconomic attainment: ð1Þ family socioeco- nomic background/resources, ð2Þ educational achievement, and ð3Þ occupa- tional choice/opportunity for young adults. It is now common in stratifica- tion research to stress the importance of family background ðe.g., parental educational achievementÞ on a child’s life chances. Family background is a major determinant of a child’s educational achievement, and family back- ground and educational achievement are strong determinants of an adult child’s career choices and opportunities. Although given less attention in the literature, stratification research also underscores that a critical juncture in a person’s career occurs at the point 2Several comprehensive reviews of the immigration effects literature ðFix and Passel 1994; Pedace 2006; Okkerse 2008Þ and a cited reference search of pertinent studies did not reveal any studies that analyze the contextual effects of immigrant population con- centration on intragenerational social mobility. Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 37 of entry into the labor market. Blau and Duncan ð1967, pp. 48–49, 170Þ conceptualize these “career beginnings” as the intervening link between “so- cial origins and subsequent careers”; “this starting level,” they note, “affects their subsequent occupational life.” Spilerman ð1977, p. 586Þ also observes how labor market entrance is “tantamount to launching an individual on an earnings and status trajectory.” Career paths are therefore dependent to some degree upon family background, education, and early career choices and opportunities among young adults. This study extends this area of research by considering how local labor market characteristics—at the moment young adults enter the labor mar- ket, as well as contemporaneously throughout workers’ careers—influence patterns of intragenerational mobility. Specifically, in this article, I focus on whether immigrant population concentration affects entry-level choices and opportunities among young adults and, in turn, whether these initial choices and opportunities facilitate or hinder upward socioeconomic mo- bility. These point-of-entry effects on the career choices and opportunities of young adults are assessed independently from the point-in-time effects that are typically reported in cross-sectional studies. This approach to studying the effects of immigration on natives is im- portant for several reasons. First, focusing on the point of entry into the labor force allows us to better understand how native workers respond to immigration. Numerous studies examine the migratory response of natives to immigrant population concentration ðFrey 1995, 1999; White and Liang 1998; Card 2001; Kritz and Gurak 2001; White and Borjas 2006Þ, but natives may respond to immigration in other ways that are just as relevant, if not more relevant, to the substitution/complement debate. For reasons explained in the following section, the population share of foreign born in the local area may have significant effects on the job opportunities for young native-born adults, and these early job choices and opportunities may place young natives on a particular career path. In a manner similar to se- lective migration—for example, less educated natives avoiding high levels of immigrant population concentration when considering relocation ðFrey 1995, 1999; White and Liang 1998Þ—young native-born adults may select into different types of careers depending on the local level of immigration. Second, substitution/complement-based research carried out to date im- plicitly assumes that the contemporaneous effect of immigration on indi- vidual differences in earnings across local labor markets ði.e., between- individual effectsÞ is equivalent to the effect of immigration on changes in earnings across an individual’s career ði.e., within-individual effectsÞ. Yet, because people likely adjust to the effects of immigrant population con- centration at discrete points in their career ðe.g., when young adults first enter the labor marketÞ, these cross-sectional effects are perhaps different for people in different stages of their career or different for people that be- American Journal of Sociology 38 gan their careers under vastly different types of local labor markets condi- tions. Because of migration, even people of similar age living in the same area at the same time have likely had different levels of exposure to immi- grant population concentration. This heterogeneity within the population presents a difficult challenge for cross-sectional research designs. A longi- tudinal research design is better equipped to deal with these complex issues because the longitudinal data allow researchers to decompose the effects of immigrant population concentration into its respective between-individual and within-individual effects. In the next section I elaborate on why immi- grant population concentration may have important implications for the career paths of young adults. IMMIGRATION AND POINT-OF-ENTRY EFFECTS Entry-level jobs for many individuals are the stepping stones to future so- cioeconomic mobility, and these entry-level opportunities are likely to be es- pecially sensitive to local labor market conditions. Conventional arguments suggest that young adults will have more difficulty climbing the socioeco- nomic ladder without the benefit of access to these entry-level employment opportunities. However, we simply do not know whether high levels of im- migration affect entry positions for young adults in ways that influence their career trajectories over the long run. Employers of many lower-paying, physical, dirty, dangerous, andmenial jobs—jobs at the bottom of the job ladder—seek laborers that are not only hardworking and reliable but are also acquiescent and expendable. Im- migrant labor fills these requirements for many employers of the least de- sirable jobs in advanced capitalist societies ðPiore 1979; Johnson-Webb 2002; Kandel and Parrado 2005; Zamudio and Lichter 2008; Orrenius and Zavodny 2009Þ. In fact, over the past several decades a progression has left some industries virtually dependent on immigrant labor. When an em- ployer prefers immigrants to do the work he or she believes native workers will not do, or not do as well, and native workers find employment avenues blocked through mechanisms of social closure enacted by immigrant net- works ðWaldinger and Lichter 2003Þ, then native workers could be ad- versely affected, not only in the short term, but throughout the course of their working careers. This is especially problematic if entry-level positions for native workers are limited or cut off entirely. Limited access to entry- level employment translates into limited access to job training and skill- building opportunities. Having limited entry-level opportunities could then directly affect young people’s career trajectories by impeding the main con- duit through which experience and work-based human capital is acquired. Those who insist that foreign-born workers are mainly substitutes for native-born workers maintain this position: high concentrations of immi- Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 39 grant labor block entry-level positions for young native workers, which in turn impedes the ability of natives to acquire valuable work experience ðBriggs 1993Þ. Therefore, the modest ðbut in recent studies consistentÞ neg- ative contemporaneous effect of immigrant population concentration on native-born earnings could operate primarily through the constraints that high levels of immigration impose on the employment opportunities for young native-born adults. According to this perspective, we should antici- pate immigrant population concentration at the point of entry into the labor force to have a negative effect on the career trajectories of native workers (i.e., on earnings and occupational status attainment). Scholars also recognize that foreign-born labor can complement the em- ployment opportunites of native workers and provide a range of compelling explanations for this phenomenon. The work that the majority of foreign- born workers do in the United States is ranked at the bottom of the job lad- der. ðNotwithstanding the fact that foreign-born workers in the U.S. econ- omy are found at all levels of the occupational hierarchy.Þ Jobs at the bottom of the ladder are most likely to be eschewed by native workers, and this aversion is amplified by the negative stigma attached to these jobs when they become labeled “immigrant jobs.” Indeed, when employers of immi- grants in the United States are asked why they predominately hire foreign- born workers they often say native workers do not apply ðsee Waldinger and Lichter 2003, pp. 213–14Þ. Although demand forworkers at the bottom of the occupational hierarchy has remained strong, the domestic supply of workers willing to take these lower-level jobs presumably has not. Com- plementary relations between native- and foreign-bornworkers are based on the idea that native-born workers are unwilling to do the types of jobs the majority of immigrants do for the wages and status they receive. These complementary labor relations suggest that prospective employ- ees hold preconceived ideas about what types of jobs applicants are best suited to work. An employee’s expectations concerning employment pros- pects are shaped by what is deemed accessible and appropriate work for someone with his or her social characteristics. Job expectations and pref- erences are not solely based onwages, nor are wages entirely free to respond to changes in the supply of workers. People expect wages to reflect social status to some degree, and the labor market is embedded within formal and informal social relations that protect the association between occupational status and earnings. This is why simply increasing wages at the bottom of the hierarchy to attract native workers is potentially problematic. A wage increase at the bottom of the job ladder may induce structural inflation—a form of inflationary pressure on wages that starts at the bottom of the job ladder and progresses upward—leaving the aversion native workers have toward low-status jobs unchanged despite the higher pay ðPiore 1979; Massey, Durand, and Malone 2002, pp. 15–16Þ. American Journal of Sociology 40 When considering the impact of local labor markets on people’s career trajectories, it is important to recognize that the strength of the motiva- tional tie between work and social status is mutable, especially for people of different ages living in different areas. During young adulthood, status expectations are particularly in flux and heavily shaped by their milieu. Similar conceptually to the different frames of reference between foreign- and native-born workers ðPiore 1979Þ, people at different ages and in dif- ferent places within the United States maintain alternative frames of ref- erence as well. Employment preferences among natives therefore tend to vary by age and location. Relative to older workers, young workers are less likely to be fully com- mitted to their work and are more likely to receive status and respect from their family and friends than from their jobs ðsee Massey et al. 2002, pp. 17–18Þ. The prestige of one’s job for young workers may not be as im- portant as the financial freedom and friendship it provides. Even if young adults have long-term career goals, the immediate gratification and au- tonomy that even jobs at the bottom of the hierarchy provide is enough to draw in young native-born workers. In fact, in many instances, menial jobs allow young adults the chance to defer the responsibility and commit- ment that professional careers require and that youthful lifestyles oppose. Wiley ð1967, p. 150Þ refers to this situation as an “age-grade mobility trap,” where younger age groups maintain prestige standards that differ from those of older workers. Black ð2009Þ captures this dynamic among a group of street youths as they “age off the street” and come to embrace an identity of “working-class respectability.” Mature native-born workers, like many foreign-born workers, may withstand the unpleasantness of many dirty, dangerous, andmenial jobs in order to provide for their family ðBlack 2009, pp. 158–62;MacLeod 2009Þ. Young native-bornworkers, on the other hand, at an early stage in life are less likely to view their job as a sacrifice. In most cases, jobs at the bottom of the ladder are not seen as an option of last resort among young adults, but as temporary and convenient sources of employ- ment. As a result, for many youths the fickle start of a “career” begins with- out much forethought. The social significance of the status attached to jobs at the bottom of the ladder is likely to be socially contingent upon the characteristics of the in- dividual ðe.g., ageÞ and on the characteristics of the local labor market, es- pecially immigrant population concentration. In local labor markets with few foreign-born workers, many of the lower-paying, dangerous, dirty, and menial jobs may be seen as viable employment opportunities among young natives because they know family and friends who do similar work. In high immigrant concentration areas, on the other hand, young native workers are less likely to consider the same lower-paying, dangerous, dirty, and menial jobs as socially appropriate. When immigrants are overrepresented Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 41 in the jobs at the bottom of the ladder, the negative status attached to these jobs may fall beneath a threshold acceptable to many young native work- ers. This threshold is the “social minimum” that native workers perceive— a social minimum is the lowest-level occupational status that is socially acceptable to a job seeker ðsimilar to a reservation wageÞ.3 High levels of immigration may inflate the social minimum among young native workers, driving them to seek entry into other areas of the labor market. This infla- tion of the social minimum was likely to be particularly true during the 1980s and 1990s, when many newly arriving immigrants carried the addi- tional stigma of being dark-skinned minorities from less developed coun- tries with limited formal education and limited English proficiency ðsee Smith and Edmonston 1997; Alba and Nee 2003Þ. Immigrants in high immigrant concentration labor markets dominate many of the job vacancies at the bottom of the occupational hierarchy. Therefore, many young native-born adults who would have otherwise grav- itated toward a career path of least resistance ðe.g., jobs with low levels of responsibility and commitmentÞ end up detached from job opportunities at the bottom of the occupational hierarchy, making it more likely that they will seek semiprofessional or professional career paths.Muller’s ð1993, p. 143Þ observation that a key effect of immigration has been to change the distribution of jobs available to native workers “away from manufac- turing and lower-skill services toward the white-collar sector, particularly in management and the professions,” provides some credence to this possibility. From this perspective, we should expect immigrant population concentra- tion at the point of entry into the labor force to have a positive effect on the career trajectories of native-born workers (i.e., earnings and occupational status attainment). By focusing on the effects of immigrant population concentration at the point of entry into the labor market, this research brings into the forefront two equally compelling but diametrically opposed reasons for the expec- tation that immigration will affect native workers’ career trajectories. These two reasons constitute viable possibilities that scholars of the immigration 3The term “social minimum” comes from Piore’s ð1979, pp. 93–101Þ classic Birds of Passage. For Piore, and the economist he references, a “social minimum” refers to the consensus among a community concerning a minimum wage—in contrast to the “stat- utory minimum,” which is the lowest wage set by law. As Piore and others recognize, there are often meaningful discrepancies between the “social minimum” and “statutory minimum” that are not well understood. Piore writes ð1979, p. 101Þ: “For whatever rea- son, employers . . . seem to feel that there exists a social minimum that is above the stat- ute ½minimum and below which they cannot attract and hold ½native labor.” I use the term “social minimum” somewhat differently in this article. Here, “social minimum” is closer in spirit to Piore’s initial intention, which takes on more explanatory power when it is used in direct reference to the status hierarchy of the occupational structure rather than the wage structure. American Journal of Sociology 42 debate need to adjudicate. This research offers an explicit examination of the point-of-entry effect hypothesis among workers who primarily entered the labor force when the recent wave of mass immigration began to esca- late nationwide during the 1980s ðsee table 1Þ. DATA AND METHODS The primary data source for this study is the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth ðNLSY79Þ. The NLSY79 is a longitudinal survey fre- quently used to study labor market outcomes over the life course ðe.g., Fi- scher et al. 1996; Carneiro, Heckman, and Masterov 2005; Tomaskovic- Devey, Thomas, and Johnson 2005Þ. Respondents for the NLSY79 were between the ages 14 and 22 in 1979 when the survey began. These respon- dents were interviewed annually through 1994 and biannually since that time. The response rate ðdefined as the percentage of initial respondents re- maining eligible to be reinterviewedÞ through the 2002 round of interviews is 80.9%. The NLSY79 consists of 12,686 respondents from three subsamples taken in 1979: ðaÞ a nationally representative cross-sectional sample of 6,111 respondents; ðbÞ an oversample of 1280 respondents enlisted in the military; and ðcÞ an oversample of 5,295 blacks, Hispanics and poor non- black and non-Hispanic whites. After 1984 theNLSY79 no longer followed the military sample, and after the 1990 round of interviews the survey also dropped the oversample of poor whites. Because these two subsamples are not present for the duration of the study, they are excluded from the analysis. Local labor markets are operationalized as a combination of U.S. met- ropolitan areas and U.S. counties. Counties are the areal unit for those respondents not living in metropolitan areas. This operationalization en- sures that respondents who move between metro and nonmetro areas contribute to the analysis. Data at the metropolitan and county level come from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Decennial Census Summary Level 3 tapes.4 Yearly estimates of local labor market characteristics are unavailable. Con- sequently, for noncensus years, community measures are interpolated from the decennial census data. These data are then attached to the georefer- enced NLSY79 data set. Dependent Variables The dependent variables for this study are hourly earnings and occupa- tional status. Hourly earnings are derived from a series of NLSY questions 4U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, http://www.icpsr.com. 43 Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers T A B L E 1 T h e E x p l i c i t a n d I m p l i c i t H y p o t h e s e s U s e d i n a C a r e e r T r a j e c t o r y A n a l y s i s o f I m m i g r a t i o n E f f e c t s H yp ot h es is D es cr ip ti on E xp ec te d F in di n g Im p lic it : 1. C on te m po ra n eo u s ef fe ct s . . . . . . . . . . A m aj or it y of re ce nt st u d ie s re p or t a n eg at iv e co n te m p or an eo u s ef fe ct of im m ig ra n t p op u la ti on co n ce nt ra ti on on ea rn in gs . N eg at iv e co ef fi ci en ts fo r th e co n te m po ra n eo u s ef fe ct s on th e gr ow th p ar am et er s ðin te rc ep t an d sl op eÞ. 2. D is ti n ct io n b et w ee n p oi n t- of -e n tr y an d co n te m p or an eo u s ef fe ct s . . . . . . . B ec au se yo un g ad u lt s ar e es pe ci al ly lik el y to b e af fe ct ed b y lo ca l la b or m ar k et co n di ti on s at en tr y in to th e la b or m ar k et , a d is ti n ct io n b et w ee n p oi n t- of -e n tr y ef fe ct s an d co n te m po ra n eo u s ef fe ct s is w ar ra n te d . M od el s th at ac co u n t fo r b ot h p oi n t- of -e n tr y an d co n te m po ra n eo u s ef fe ct s w ill h av e th e lo w es t fi t in d ic es ði. e. , b es t m od el fi tÞ. 3. E d uc at io n an d m ig ra ti on st at u s . . . . . T h os e w it h lo w er le v el s of ed u ca ti on th at h av e n ev er m ov ed fr om th ei r in it ia l lo ca l la b or m ar k et ar e m or e lik el y to b e af fe ct ed b y fo re ig n -b or n co m pe ti ti on . T h e co ef fi ci en ts fo r % fo re ig n -b or n w ill b e la rg er in m ag n it u d e in th e su b m od el s th at in cl u d e on ly th os e w it h lo w le v el s of ed u ca ti on th at n ev er m ov ed fr om th ei r in it ia l lo ca l la b or m ar k et . E xp lic it : 1. N eg at iv e p oi nt of en tr y . . . . . . . . . . . Im m ig ra n t p op u la ti on co n ce nt ra ti on at th e p oi n t of en tr y in to th e la b or fo rc e w ill h av e a n eg at iv e ef fe ct on th e ca re er tr aj ec to ri es of n at iv e w or k er s ði. e. , ea rn in gs an d oc cu p at io n al st at u s at ta in m en tÞ. N eg at iv e co ef fi ci en ts fo r % fo re ig n -b or n at en tr y on th e gr ow th p ar am et er s fo r ea rn in gs an d oc cu p at io n al st at u s. 2. P os it iv e p oi n t of en tr y . . . . . . . . . . . . Im m ig ra n t p op u la ti on co n ce nt ra ti on at th e p oi n t of en tr y in to th e la b or fo rc e w ill h av e a p os it iv e ef fe ct on th e ca re er tr aj ec to ri es of n at iv e- b or n w or k er s ði. e. , ea rn in gs an d oc cu p at io n al st at u s at ta in m en tÞ. P os it iv e co ef fi ci en ts fo r % fo re ig n -b or n at en tr y on th e gr ow th p ar am et er s fo r ea rn in gs an d oc cu p at io n al st at u s. N O T E .— Im p lic it h yp ot h es es fi n d ge ne ra l su pp or t in th e lit er at u re . H yp ot h es es th at ar e st at ed ex p lic it ly ar e th os e th at ar e su p po rt ed b y co m pe ti n g p er sp ec ti v es an d ar e b as ed u p on lit tl e p re v io u s em p ir ic al re se ar ch . about the respondent’s employment and sources of income. Hourly earn- ings include all forms of compensation ðe.g., tips, wage, salary, etc.Þ and are standardized to an hourly scale in 2004 U.S. dollars ðthe last year of this studyÞ and converted into natural log form. Occupational status is the second dependent variable and is measured by the Nam-Powers-Boyd occupational status scale, which ranks occupa- tions according to their average level of educational attainment and income ðNam and Boyd 2004Þ. This scale has several desirable qualities. First, the scale is constant over time regardless of changes in occupational classifica- tion. Second, the calculation of the scale is straightforward, using existing census data. Third, the scores have an intuitive interpretation that repre- sents the proportion of persons in the civilian labor force who are in occu- pations with lower levels of education and income than that particular oc- cupation. For example, a score of .80 indicates that 80% of the labor force works in an occupation with lower levels of education and income, on av- erage, than that particular occupation. For this research, the occupational scale is calculated three times using the 1970, 1980, and 2000 U.S. census occupational codes that correspond to the codes provided by the NLSY79. The NLSY79 uses the 1970 census occupational codes for years 1979–81, the 1980 census codes from 1982–2000, and the 2000 census codes from 2002–4. The occupational scale is calculated separately for men and for women.5 Independent Variables Individual characteristics.—The respondent’s age, gender, and racial/eth- nic status are the three main demographic characteristics in the analysis. Age is a continuous variable that captures the subject-specific rate of social mobility. The NLSY79 provides detailed information on the respondent’s race and ethnicity; however, sample size limits the analysis to non-Hispanic blacks, non-Hispanic whites, and Hispanics. Other important demographic characteristics are the respondent’s marital status, number of children, school enrollment, educational achievement, and generational status. Mar- ital status is codedwith a dummy variable scored 1 for married respondents and 0 for the unmarried. Number of children is the number of the respon- dent’s biological children, adopted children, or stepchildren living in the household. School enrollment is a dummy variable scored 1 if the respon- dent is currently enrolled in school. Education ismeasured as years of school completed. Those of second-generation status are coded 1 versus those that 5It is necessary to consider occupational attainment separately for men and for women because women on average tend to have higher levels of education than men in the same occupation, whereas men on average have higher earnings when compared to women in the same occupation ðWarren, Sheridan, and Hauser 1998Þ. Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 45 are native-born of native parentage, which are coded 0. Foreign-born re- spondents in the NLSY are excluded from the analysis. All of these vari- ables except the respondents’ gender, racial/ethnic identity, and genera- tional status are measured at each NLSY interview and are treated as time-varying covariates. This research also controls for important childhood background char- acteristics ðFischer et al. 1996; Carneiro et al. 2005Þ. Parental education is an essential background characteristic, and the models here include father’s educational attainment measured as years of schooling completed. Where data are missing for father’s education, the mother’s education is used. The models also include an indicator for whether the respondent grew up in an intact household ðdefined as living with both biological parents at age 14Þ. The number of siblings at the time of the 1979 interview is included in the analysis, as well as whether the respondent is the oldest or youngest child ðmiddle child is the reference categoryÞ. Last, a measure of cognitive ability is included via the NLSY79’s record of the Armed Forces Qualifying Test ðAFQTÞ.6 These measures are recorded in the initial NLSY interviews and remain time invariant throughout the analysis. Local labor market characteristics.—The focal independent variable is the percentage of the metropolitan or county population that is foreign born.7 However, the expansion of global markets over the last quarter cen- tury has affected advanced capitalist societies in ways other than increas- ing its levels of immigration. Most notably are deindustrialization processes and the growth of high-end and low-end service jobs that have affected the economies of many local U.S. labor markets. Therefore, it is important to consider a number of local labor market characteristics ðin addition to im- migrant population concentrationÞ that might influence people’s career tra- jectories. 6 In this study the residualized AFQT score is constructed following a technique used by Carneiro et al. ð2005Þ. 7This research relies on the official Census Bureau Summary File ðCBSFÞ tables to cal- culate the percentage of the population that is foreign-born. Although a more detailed measure of the foreign-born population would be ideal, the information concerning the foreign-born population in the CBSF tables is quite limited going back to the 1980 cen- sus. An alternative approach would be to do the data aggregations myself using census microdata ðPUMSÞ. However, in addition to excluding all the NLSY observations in nonmetropolitan counties—which in a longitudinal study is more vexing than in a cross- sectional design—aggregating up from the microdata to get MSA measures is also po- tentially problematic because there are numerous “partly identified”metropolitan areas. As a sensitivity check, I created a measure using census microdata that captures the gender-specific age group that ismost likely to be competingwith themen and thewomen from theNLSY79 cohort. In these analyses,we still observe positive point-of-entry effects and negative contemporaneous effects using the gender- and age-specific measure of im- migrant population concentration. American Journal of Sociology 46 The relative size of the manufacturing sector within the local labor market is a potentially important control variable. Manufacturing is mea- sured as the proportion of the labor force employed in manufacturing in- dustries. Another important consideration is the size and composition of the service sector ðJaret, Reid, and Adelman 2003; Wang 2008Þ. Following Jaret et al. ð2003Þ, low-end services are measured as the proportion of the labor force in industries that include personal services, such as entertain- ment and recreation services, hotels and lodging places, private household services, and other miscellaneous personal services. The high-end service sector includes finance, insurance, and real estate ðFIREÞ industries. Other potentially important local characteristics are the size of the area’s popu- lation, its share of the non-Hispanic black population, the unemployment rate, the size of public-sector employment, and its median level of family income, which is an important control variable that adjusts the analyses to the cost-of-living differences between communities ðfor descriptive statis- tics, see table 2Þ. Analytic Approach TheNLSY79 data records are organized in a person-year format. Each row represents a ðbiÞannual observation for each NLSY79 respondent. The maximum observations any one individual can contribute over the study period is 21; the minimum number of observations is 1. Using longitudinal data organized in a person-year format to analyze individual career tra- jectories violates the independent and identically distributed ði.i.d.Þ as- sumptions of classic linear regression. Researchers overcome these limita- tions by using mixed models that incorporate fixed and random effects. This study uses a specific type of mixed model for longitudinal data— a growth curve model—where the interest is in modeling individual change over time ðRaudenbush and Bryk 2002; Singer and Willett 2003Þ. Growth curve models are being used increasingly in social stratification research ðe.g., Bernhardt et al. 2001; Fuller 2008; Hall and Farkas 2008Þ because they enable researchers to identify the individual trajectories of change across time that deviate from an average trend and allows them to use covariates to explain that deviation. In addition to person-year observations clustered within persons, this analysis must also contend with the clustering of observations within local labor markets. Raudenbush and Bryk ð2002, pp. 237–44Þ describe a similar data structure where children’s learning growth is modeled as a function of school-level differences ðtheir basic formulation is similar to the model proposed hereÞ. However, there is an important complexity to this study that is pertinent to multilevel studies of individual behavior within areal Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 47 T A B L E 2 D e s c r i p t i v e S t a t i s t i c s V ar ia b le N am e D es cr ip ti on M in M ax M ea n S D N L S Y 79 D at a: D ep en d en t: E ar ni n gs ðln Þ. . . . . . . . T h e n at u ra l lo g of h ou rl y p ay , st an d ar d iz ed in 20 04 $U S 5 7. 6 2. 41 .6 5 O cc up at io n al st at u s . . . N am -P ow er s- B oy d oc cu p at io n al st at u s sc al e 0 1 .4 9 .2 5 In de p en de n t: M ai n as cr ip ti v e st at u se s: W hi te . . . . . . . . . . . . . R es p on d en t’ s st at u s is n on -H is p an ic w h it e 0 1. 0 .5 0 .5 0 B la ck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R es p on d en t’ s st at u s is n on -H is p an ic b la ck 0 1. 0 .3 3 .4 7 L at in o . . . . . . . . . . . . . R es p on d en t’ s st at u s is H is p an ic 0 1. 0 .1 7 .3 7 M al e/ fe m al e . . . . . . . . . R es p on d en t’ s st at u s is co d ed 1 fo r w om en an d 0 fo r m en 0 1. 0 .4 9 .5 0 In d iv id u al ch ar ac te ri st ic s: A ge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . R es p on d en t’ s ag e at th e ti m e of th e N L S Y in te rv ie w 14 48 .0 28 .7 4 7. 27 M ar ri ed . . . . . . . . . . . . R es p on d en t’ s m ar it al st at u s co d ed 1 fo r m ar ri ed , co d ed 0 ot h er w is e 0 1. 0 .4 2 .4 9 C h ild re n . . . . . . . . . . . N o. of re sp on d en t’ s b io lo gi ca l, ad op te d , or st ep ch ild re n liv in g in th e h ou se ho ld 0 10 .0 .8 3 1. 13 E n ro lle d in sc h oo l . . . . C u rr en tl y en ro lle d in a sc ho ol p ro gr am 0 1. 0 .1 4 .3 4 E d u ca ti on . . . . . . . . . . Y ea rs of sc ho ol in g co m pl et ed 0 20 .0 12 .8 2 2. 19 S ec on d -g en er at io n st at u s . . . . . . . . . . . . R es p on d en t is co d ed 1 fo r se co n d ge n er at io n an d 0 fo r b ei n g n at iv e b or n of n at iv e p ar en ta ge 0 1. 0 .0 74 .2 6 P ar en ta l ed u ca ti on . . . . F at he r’ s ed u ca ti on le v el in 19 79 ; if m is si n g m ot h er ’s ed u ca ti on in 19 79 0 20 .0 11 .0 4 3. 67 In ta ct h ou se h ol d . . . . . . L iv ed w it h b ot h b io lo gi ca l p ar en ts at ag e 14 0 1. 0 .6 9 .4 6 N o. si b lin gs . . . . . . . . . N o. of si b lin gs at th e ti m e of th e in it ia l 19 79 in te rv ie w 0 22 .0 3. 76 2. 58 48 F ir st b or n /o n ly ch ild . . . . . R es p on d en t is th e ol d es t or on ly si b lin g ð1 5 ye s, 0 5 n oÞ ; ðm id dl e ch ild is th e re fe re nc e ca te go ry Þ 0 1. 0 .2 7 .4 4 Y ou ng es t si b lin g . . . . . . . R es p on d en t is th e yo u n ge st si b lin g ð1 5 ye s, 0 5 n oÞ ; ðm id d le ch ild is th e re fe re nc e ca te go ry Þ 0 1. 0 .2 8 .4 5 A F Q T . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A ge -a d ju st ed A rm ed F or ce Q u al if yi n g T es t 2 2 2. 4 .0 0 1. 00 R es id en ti al d u ra ti on . . . . . T im e in ye ar s sp en t in cu rr en t lo ca l la b or m ar k et 1 21 .0 7. 22 5. 50 D ec en ni al C en su sS um m ar y F ile 3: C om m u n it y ch ar ac te ri st ic s: % em p lo ye d in m an u fa c- tu ri n g . . . . . . . . . . . . . P ro p or ti on of th e ci v ili an w or kf or ce em p lo ye d in m an u fa ct u ri n g 0 .5 .1 5 .0 7 % em p lo ye d in h ig h -e n d se rv ic e . . . . . . . . . . . . . P ro p or ti on of th e ci v ili an w or kf or ce em p lo ye d in fi n an ce , in su ra n ce , an d re al es ta te se rv ic es 0 .1 .0 3 .0 1 % em p lo ye d lo w -e n d se rv ic e . . . . . . . . . . . . . P ro p or ti on of th e ci v ili an w or kf or ce em p lo ye d in p er so n al se rv ic es or in en te rt ai n m en t an d re cr ea ti on se rv ic es 0 .2 .0 4 .0 1 % em p lo ye d in go v er n- m en t. . . . . . . . . . . . . P ro p or ti on of th e ci v ili an w or kf or ce em p lo ye d in lo ca l, st at e, or fe de ra l go v er nm en t 0 .4 .1 3 .0 5 P op u la ti on si ze ðln Þ. . . . . N at u ra l lo g of th e p op u la ti on 6 16 .1 13 .3 7 1. 75 U n em pl oy m en t ra te . . . . . P ro p or ti on of th e ci v ili an w or kf or ce th at is u n em p lo ye d 0 .2 .0 7 .0 2 M ed ia n fa m ily in co m e . . . M ed ia n fa m ily in co m e in th e lo ca l la b or m ar k et ðst an d ar d iz ed in 20 04 d ol la rs Þ 17 16 7. 9 52 .2 7 11 .8 2 % b la ck . . . . . . . . . . . . . P ro p or ti on of th e p op u la ti on th at is n on -H is p an ic b la ck 0 .9 .1 4 .1 1 % fo re ig n -b or n . . . . . . . . P ro p or ti on of th e p op u la ti on th at is fo re ig n -b or n 0 .5 .0 8 .0 9 49 units. The primary complexity is that the structure of clustering in this study is not hierarchical as is typical in multilevel studies. This issue stems from the fact that, over time, individuals may move and come to live in any number of different local labor markets. Therefore, many individuals are not simply clustered within a single metropolitan area or county. This com- plexity necessitates two methodological modifications. First, the grouping factors ði.e., persons and geographiesÞ are considered partially cross-classified grouping factors ðZaccarin andRivellini 2002; Ras- bash and Browne 2008Þ. Cross classification means that person-year ob- servations are clustered within persons, and person-year observations are clustered within geographic units, but persons are not considered clustered within geographic units. Persons are crossedwith geographic units. To han- dle the computational complexity of cross-classified grouping factors, this re- search employs sparse matrix methods developed by Bates ð2005; Baayen, Davidson, and Bates 2008Þ and implemented on the open source software R. This numerical method for mixed models is developed to efficiently esti- mate cross classified variance components on large data sets where other approaches are often intractable. Second, because some people move into and out of a local area many times over the course of their lives, while others never move, it may be im- portant to account for the duration of time individuals have spent in their local environments. Therefore, all models include a measure of years lived in the current metropolitan area or county of residence. This study also ac- knowledges the potential for bias in the estimates of immigration effects stemming from selective migration ðe.g., Frey 1995, 1999; White and Liang 1998; Card 2001Þ. To further address this issue, this study provides sub- models that distinguish respondents by their previous migration experience. These submodels will illustrate how a commonly unobserved population characteristic ðlike migratory experienceÞ affects the association between immigrant population concentration and earnings. Additionally, there are supplemental analyses discussed below that employ inverse probability weighting and instrumental variables to address the general problem of en- dogeneity bias that can be induced through differential migration or other factors.8 Formally, the composite equation for the intercepts only ði.e., nullÞ cross classified multilevel growth-curve model is as follows: Yi jkð Þ 5 b00 1 b01ðage 40ijÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} fixed effects 1 z0j 1 z1jðage 40ijÞ1 u0k 1 εið jkÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} random effects ; ozj 5 j2 z0 jz0z1 j 2 z1 " # ð1Þ 8There is also a third consideration. As with patterns of selective migration, there is a concern about whether immigrant population concentration affects an individual’s American Journal of Sociology 50 The grouping factors ijk refer to measurement occasion i for individual j in community of current residence k. The subscripts jk are written within parentheses to indicate that they are cross classified grouping factors. Ze- tas ðz0j; z1j  ageijÞ, upsilon ðukÞ, and epsilon ðεið jkÞÞ are the random effects for the individuals, communities, and transitory or idiosyncratic factors, re- spectively. Beta ðb00Þ is the fixed intercept ðaverage hourly earningsÞ, and b01 is the fixed slope for age ðaverage rate of earnings growthÞ. These are the growth parameters in a multilevel model of change. At the person level the variance-covariance matrix ozj of the random effects is unstructured. The continuous independent variables are grand mean centered, and age is centered at 40 years. Centering age on 40 allows the researcher to evaluate earnings later in people’s careers, as opposed to earlier, when dif- ferences in earnings between young adults are smaller in magnitude. Cen- tering age in this manner means that the main effects for immigrant popu- lation concentration correspond to the average effect in a cross section of the metropolitan or county population at age 40 ðfor those who were born be- tween 1957 and 1965 and present in the United States in 1979Þ. Point-of-Entry and Contemporaneous Effects The effects of immigrant population concentration on patterns of intra- generational mobility are hypothesized to be particularly important when young adults enter the labor market. This research takes a time-centering approach to operationalize this point-of-entry period ðSinger and Willett 2003Þ. The point of entry is determined by the first person-year observa- tion in which the respondent is no longer enrolled in school. Beginning in 1979, as soon as there is a break in a respondent’s consecutive annual school enrollment, a point of entry is determined. For example, if a respondent is enrolled in school from 1979 to 1982 and then is no longer enrolled in 1983, 1983 is designated as the point of entry. If the person is not enrolled in 1979, then that year marks their point of entry into the workforce. Operationaliz- chances of employment. Although the effects of immigration on native employment are incorporated into a career trajectory ðe.g., those unable to acquire work experience will likely earn less and see less occupational mobility over the long termÞ, there could still be bias in the estimates. In an attempt to address this issue, I conducted supplemental an- alyses that included a Heckman correction. The Heckman correction involves calculat- ing an inverse Mills ratio from a probit regression of employment status on all the co- variates and an exclusion restriction ðWooldridge 2002Þ. The exclusion restriction used for this exercise is a NLSY variable that captures whether the respondent experiences any functional health limitations related to work. The models with the Heckman cor- rection are not appreciably different from the models presented in the text. However, because functional health limitation is a weak exclusion restriction, and a stronger al- ternative is unavailable, the models with the Heckman correction are omitted from the text. Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 51 ing the point of entry in this matter captures a period in time when young adults are likely seeking employment for the purpose of gaining indepen- dence from their parental household. Each individual in the data set has a designated year and location that marks his or her point of entry. Then, %foreign born is measured at the point of entry for each individual and remains a time-invariant covariate throughout the analysis. The regression models continue to control for school enrollment status as a time-varying characteristic to account for those who return to school later in life. Singer and Willett ð2003, pp. 175–76Þ refer to the coding technique em- ployed in this research as time-1 centering. This technique allows me to decompose the effects of immigrant population concentration into their re- spective point-of-entry effects ði.e., between-individual effectsÞ and contem- poraneous effects ði.e.,within-individual effectsÞ. By decomposing the effect of immigrant population concentration into its point of entry and contem- poraneous components, the parameter estimates for immigrant population concentration are less likely to be biased by the omission of an unobserved but important time-invariant individual characteristic. The contemporane- ous effect for immigrant population concentration is rendered “fixed” in a fashion similar to de-meaning the indicators via a fixed-effects estimator or via a least-squares dummy variable ðLSDVÞ estimator ðsee Raudenbush andBryk 2002, p. 262; Halaby 2004Þ. The difference is that, instead of using the average level of individual exposure to a contextual factor to assess the effects that exist between individuals, the time-centered approach uses the level of the explanatory variable at the point of entry ðor some other mean- ingful period in timeÞ. The contemporaneous effect ði.e., within-individual effectÞ is measured as a deviation from the point of entry ðrather than the meanÞ: Xið jkÞ-Z0ð jkÞ, where Xið jkÞ is the contemporaneous level of immigrant population concentration, and Z0ð jkÞ is the level of immigrant population concentration at the point of entry. The hypotheses developed above antic- ipate that the effects of immigrant population composition, when decom- posed into its respective contemporaneous and point-of-entry components, will uniquely affect earnings and occupational attainment. These hypothe- ses are ideally suited for time-1 centering. A CAREER TRAJECTORY ANALYSIS OF EARNINGS ATTAINMENT An implicit but critical assumption of this research is that there are unique point-of-entry effects that differ in meaningful ways from contemporane- ous effects. Table 3 evaluates this key assumption. To assess whether or not point-of-entry effects are distinct from contemporaneous effects, table 3 provides model fit statistics for five different representations of immi- grant population concentration. The Bayesian information criterion ðBICÞ, Akaike’s information criterion ðAICÞ, and deviance information criterion American Journal of Sociology 52 ðDICÞ ðRaftery 1995; Spiegelhalter et al. 2002Þ assess the competing model specifications. Parsimoniousmodels with a higher degree of fidelitywill have lower fit statistics. All models include the full list of control variables. The model specifi- cations proceed in the following order: Yi jkð Þ 5 b00 1 b01ðage 40ijÞ1 b02ðXið jkÞÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} fixed effects 1 z0j 1 z1jðage 40ijÞ1 u0k 1 εið jkÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} random effects ð2Þ Yi jkð Þ 5 b00 1 b01ðage 40ijÞ1 b02ðXið jkÞÞ1 b03ðXið jkÞ * age 40ijÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} fixed effects 1 z0j 1 z1jðage 40ijÞ1 u0k 1 εið jkÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} random effects ð3Þ Yi jkð Þ 5 b00 1 b01ðage 40ijÞ1 b02ðXið jkÞ 2 Z 0 ð jkÞÞ1 b03ðZ 0 ð jkÞÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} fixed effects 1 z0j 1 z1jðage 40ijÞ1 u0k 1 ε ið jkÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} random effects ð4Þ Yi jkð Þ 5 b00 1 b01ðage 40ijÞ1 b02ðZ 0 ð jkÞÞ1 b03ðZ 0 ð jkÞ * age 40ijÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} fixed effects 1 z0j 1 z1jðage 40ijÞ1 u0k 1 ε ið jkÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} random effects ð5Þ TABLE 3 Model Fit Statistics for the Analysis of Immigration Population Concentration on Earnings and Earnings Growth Fixed Effects No. Fixed Effects BIC AIC DIC Specification model ð1Þ 29 162,970 162,642 162,574 Specification model ð2Þ 30 162,974 162,637 162,567 Specification model ð3Þ 30 162,982 162,644 162,574 Specification model ð4Þ 30 162,939 162,602 162,531 Specification model ð5Þ 32 162,903a 162,546a 162,472a NOTE.—For all models, no. person-years 5 114,062; no. persons 5 7,591; no. local labor markets 5 1,197; no. variance components 5 5. Data are from NLSY79. a These statistics constitute the best-fitting model. Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 53 Yi jkð Þ 5 b00 1 b01ðage 40ijÞ1 b02ðZ 0 ð jkÞÞ1 b03ðZ 0 ð jkÞ * age 40ijÞ1 b04ðXið jkÞ 2 Z 0 ð jkÞÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} fixed effects 1 b05ðXið jkÞ 2 Z 0 ð jkÞ * age 40ijÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} fixed effects 1 z0j 1 z1jðage 40ijÞ1 u0k 1 εið jkÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} random effects ð6Þ Model ð2Þ is a baseline model where XiðjkÞ is the U.S. county or metropolitan area level of immigrant population concentration that varies over time and is assessed contemporaneously at every measurement occasion. In model ð3Þ, the effect of age on earnings ði.e., the rate of earnings growthÞ is allowed to vary by the level of XiðjkÞ. The main effect of XiðjkÞ in model ð3Þ is the ef- fect of immigrant population concentration on earnings for someone that is 40 years old ðage is centered at 40Þ. The interaction effect b03 in model ð3Þ is the effect ofXiðjkÞ on the rate of earnings growth.Model ð4Þ decomposes XiðjkÞ into its contemporaneous effect ði.e., within-individual effectÞ and its point- of-entry effect ði.e., between-individual effectÞ. This approach applies Singer andWillett’s ð2003Þ time-1 centering, operationalized as b02ðXið jkÞ–Z0ð jkÞÞ plus b03ðZ0ð jkÞÞ, where b02 represents the net contemporaneous effect and b03 rep- resents the net point-of-entry effect. Similar to model ð3Þ, model ð5Þ allows the effect of age on earnings to vary by the level of immigrant population concentration at the point of entry into the labor force ðrather than contem- poraneously as in model ½3Þ. Model ð6Þ combines models ð3Þ, ð4Þ, and ð5Þ. Model ð6Þ allows the contemporaneous effects and point-of-entry effects to influence simultaneously both the average earnings ðat age 40Þ and the rate of earnings growth and is the full and most complex model. The fit statistics in table 3 indicate that model ð6Þ is a marked improve- ment over all the preceding model specifications. The difference in BIC val- ues ðas well as AIC and DICÞ from model ð6Þ to the next best-fitting model is greater than 10. This provides strong evidence of improved model fit ðRaftery 1995Þ. Thus, the analytical distinction between the point-of-entry effects and the contemporaneous effects on earnings and earnings growth is warranted.9 The aim of the remainder of the analysis is to addresses how these point-of-entry and contemporaneous effects differ. Table 4 contains results from the cross-classified growth-curve models. Model 1 provides the unconditional growth parameters for the earnings trajectories among white, black, and Hispanic men and women but does not include any control variables. Figure 1 illustrates the raw earnings tra- jectories from these unadjusted growth parameters in model 1. The differ- ential earnings’ trajectories result in a pay gap among these groups that 9For comparison, a parallel analysis using the proportion of the local population that is non-Hispanic black ðinstead of the proportion foreign bornÞ fails to find as clear a dis- tinction in model fit when decomposing the effect of black population concentration into its respective contemporaneous and point-of-entry effects. ð6Þ 54 American Journal of Sociology T A B L E 4 C r o s s - C l a s s i fi e d M u l t i l e v e l G r o w t h C u r v e E s t i m a t e s o f t h e C o n t e m p o r a n e o u s a n d P o i n t - o f - E n t r y E f f e c t s o f I m m i g r a n t P o p u l a t i o n C o n c e n t r a t i o n o n E a r n i n g s a n d E a r n i n g s G r o w t h M O D E L 1 M O D E L 2 M O D E L 3 M O D E L 4 M O D E L 5 M O D E L 6 F IX E D E F F E C T S b S E b S E b S E b S E b S E b S E E ff ec ts on h ou rl y ea rn in gs at ag e 40 : W hi te m en ðin te rc ep tÞ . . . . . . . . . 2. 91 7 .0 15 ** * 2. 66 7 .0 48 ** * 2. 66 1 .0 49 ** * 2. 67 5 .0 48 ** * 2. 30 7 .1 41 ** * 2. 58 9 .0 69 ** * W om en . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 .2 91 .0 15 ** * 2 .2 99 .0 14 ** * 2 .2 98 .0 13 ** * 2 .2 97 .0 13 ** * 2 .2 66 .0 23 ** * 2 .2 78 .0 23 ** * N on -H is pa ni c b la ck . . . . . . . . . . 2 .3 79 .0 17 ** * 2 .1 79 .0 16 ** * 2 .1 81 .0 16 ** * 2 .1 78 .0 16 ** * 2 .1 94 .0 29 ** * 2 .1 69 .0 29 ** * H is pa n ic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 .2 25 .0 22 ** * 2 .0 37 .0 21 2 .0 83 .0 22 ** * 2 .0 75 .0 20 ** * 2 .0 58 .0 39 2 .0 25 .0 35 % fo re ig n -b or n: ðX iðj kÞ Þ . . . . . . . . .1 18 .0 96 % fo re ig n -b or n at en tr y: ðZ 0 ðj kÞ Þ. . .5 63 .1 03 ** * .7 50 .1 27 ** * 1. 00 9 .2 93 ** * .5 54 .2 00 ** % fo re ig n -b or n: ðX iðj kÞ -Z 0 ðj kÞ Þ. . . . . 2 .1 73 .1 02 2 1. 17 8 .2 98 ** * .2 13 .1 43 E ff ec ts on ea rn in gs gr ow th : W hi te m en sl op e fo r ag e . . . . . . . .0 34 .0 01 ** * .0 20 .0 01 ** * .0 21 .0 01 ** * .0 21 .0 01 ** * .0 20 .0 01 ** * .0 17 .0 01 ** * W om en . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 .0 06 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 05 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 05 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 05 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 01 .0 01 2 .0 01 .0 01 N on -H is pa ni c b la ck . . . . . . . . . . 2 .0 11 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 08 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 08 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 08 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 09 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 06 .0 01 ** * H is pa n ic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 .0 07 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 03 .0 01 ** 2 .0 06 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 06 .0 01 ** * 2 .0 06 .0 02 ** 2 .0 03 .0 02 % fo re ig n -b or n: ðX iðj kÞ Þ . . . . . . . . 2 .0 12 .0 04 ** % fo re ig n -b or n at en tr y: ðZ 0 ðj kÞ Þ. . .0 40 .0 06 ** * .0 30 .0 06 ** * .0 69 .0 13 ** * .0 26 .0 11 * % fo re ig n -b or n: ðX iðj kÞ -Z 0 ðjk ÞÞ . . . . . 2 .0 41 .0 05 ** * 2 .1 32 .0 16 ** * 2 .0 10 .0 09 N O T E .— M od el s 1– 4 in cl u d e fu ll sa m p le ; m od el 5– 6 ac co u n t fo r on ly le ss ed u ca te d m ov er s. M od el s 2– 6 in cl u d e th e fo llo w in g in d iv id u al -l ev el co n tr ol va ri ab le s: m ar it al st at u s, n u m be r of ch ild re n ,e n ro lle d in sc ho ol ,l ev el of ed u ca ti on ,s ec on d -g en er at io n st at u s, p ar en ta le d u ca ti on ,w h et h er re sp on d en t gr ew u p in an in ta ct h ou se h ol d ,n u m be r of si b lin gs ,w h et h er re sp on d en t is an on ly ch ild or fi rs tb or n si b lin g, w h et h er re sp on d en t is th e yo u n ge st si b lin g, A F Q T , re si d en ti al d u ra ti on .M od el s 2– 6 in cl u d e th e fo llo w in g co m m u n it y- le ve lc on tr ol va ri ab le s: % em pl oy ed in m an uf ac tu ri n g, % em p lo ye d in h ig h -e n d se rv ic e, % em p lo ye d in lo w -e n d se rv ic e, % em p lo ye d in go ve rn m en t, p op u la ti on si ze ðln Þ, u n em p lo ym en t ra te ,m ed ia n fa m ily in co m e, % n on -H is p an ic b la ck .D at a ar e fr om N L S Y 79 . * P < .0 5. ** P < .0 1. ** * P < .0 01 . F IG . 1 .— E ar n in gs gr ow th fo r N L S Y 79 re sp on d en ts b y ge n d er gradually increases with age. By age 40, the earnings gap reported inmodel 1 is illustrated in figure 1 as the gap around the vertical dash line ði.e., the interceptÞ. Figure 1 demonstrates how earnings inequality between whites and minorities and between men and women accumulates over the life course ðTomaskovic-Devey et al. 2005Þ.10 Models 2 and 3 in table 4 take the form of model specification ð3Þ and ð5Þ, respectively. These models treat contemporaneous effects and point- of-entry effects separately. Models 4, 5, and 6 in table 4 take the form of the best-fitting model in table 3, model specification ð6Þ. The difference be- tween model 4 and models 5 and 6 is that the latter are fit to a subset of the data that includes only workers with education levels of high school or less that either ðaÞ never left their point-of-entry community ðmodel 5Þ or ðbÞ did leave their point-of-entry community ðmodel 6Þ after entering the labor market. Models 2–6 include all the control variables shown in table 2. These control variables in models 2–6 attenuate the racial and eth- nic disparity in earnings at age 40 and the disparity in the rate of earnings growth, especially among Hispanics in this cohort. Model 2 of table 4 introduces the contemporaneous measure of immi- grant population concentration. As specified in model specification ð3Þ, im- migrant population concentration ðXið jkÞÞ is allowed to affect hourly earnings and the rate of earnings growth. The results indicate that the contempo- raneous effect of immigrant population concentration on hourly earnings at age 40 is indistinguishable from zero ðb5.118, SE 5 .096Þ. The con- temporaneous effect of immigrant population concentration on earnings growth, however, is statistically significant ðb 5 2.012, P < .01Þ. On av- erage, a one percentage point increase in immigrant population concentra- tion is associated with a .012% reduction in the rate of earnings growth, annually. Thus, a 10 percentage point higher level of foreign born will re- 10At age 40, white men in the United States on average earn approximately $18.50 per hour ðe2:917Þ. White women at age 40 earn about $15.23 per hour ðe2:9172:291Þ, on average, which is about 25% less than what white men earn ½ðe2:291-1Þ  1005 ð13:80=18:502 1Þ  1005 25%. Black men at age 40 earn approximately 32% less than white men ½ðe2:379 2 1Þ  100, and black women earn roughly 49% less than white men at age 40 ½ðe2:37912:291-1Þ  100. Hispanic men at age 40 earn 20% less than white men ½ðe2:225-1Þ  100 andHispanic women at age 40 earn about 40% less than white men. The average unadjusted rate of annual earnings growth for white men is approximately 3.45% per measurement occasion ½ðe:034-1Þ  100. The average rate of earnings growth for white women is 2.83% ½ðe:0342:006-1Þ  100, which is a difference of about six-tenths of a per- centage point less earnings growth annually for white women than for white men ½ðe2:006-1Þ  100. The average rate of earnings growth is 1.10 percentage points less among black men and 1.70 percentage points less among black women than for white men. Among Hispanics, the rate of earnings growth is seven-tenths of a percentage point less for Latinos and 1.3 percentage points less for Latinas than the rate of earnings growth for white men. Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 57 duce annual earnings growth by 0.12% and over the course of 25 years, this effect is roughly equivalent to losing one year of earnings growth. This small effect corresponds to the modest substitution effect commonly re- ported in recent studies ðe.g., Reed and Danziger 2007Þ. Model 3 of table 4 substitutes the contemporaneous measure of immi- grant population concentration with the point-of-entry measure of immi- grant population concentration ðZ0ðjkÞÞ. The point-of-entry effect on earn- ings and earnings growth is positive and statistically significant. The effect of entering a local labor market that is one percentage point more con- centrated with foreign-born population translates into about 0.6% increase in earnings at age 40 ðb5 .563, P < .001Þ, and this earnings bump is partly attributed to the positive point-of-entry effect on the rate of earnings growth. A one percentage point increase in the level of foreign-born pop- ulation concentration at the time a young adult enters the labor force is associated with 0.04% annual increase in their hourly pay ðb5 :040, P < .001Þ, on average, throughout their career. The total effect of a 10 per- centage point higher level of foreign born at the point of entry translates into approximately a 16.5% earnings advantage over the course of 25 years ½6%1 10:5%5 16:5%; ð1:00425 5 ð1:1052 1Þ  1005 10:5%. This is a modest cumulative effect that suggests young adults entering the labor market in highly concentrated immigrant areas have opportunities and make choices that are beneficial to their career trajectories. Model 4 of table 4 takes the form of the best fitting model from table 3 ðmodel specification ½6Þ. Model 4 introduces the time-1 centering technique that allows us to assess the contemporaneous effect and the point-of-entry effect of immigrant population concentration on earnings and earnings- growth simultaneously. This model is important because we have seen from model 2 and model 3 in table 4 that the effects of immigrant popula- tion concentration pull in different directions at different times during a worker’s career ðan effect similar to Simpson’s paradoxÞ. Therefore, any as- sessment of one effect without accounting for the other effect will be biased toward zero. This is evident when comparing the effects in model 2 and model 3 with the effects in model 4. In model 4 of table 4, the point-of-entry effect on earnings at age 40 is 29% larger than the corresponding effect in model 3 ð.7222 .559/.559Þ be- cause model 4 adjusts for the negative contemporaneous effect. Although the point-of-entry effect on earnings growth is relatively unaffected by the simultaneous estimation of both characteristics ðb5 :040, P < .001 vs. b5 :030, P < .001Þ, the suppression of the contemporaneous effect on earnings growth is quite large. In fact, the effect in model 4 is 2.4 times greater than its magnitude in model 2 ð2.0411 .012/2.012Þ. Essentially, the analysis in table 4 reveals heterogeneous effects ðsee Xie, Brand, and Jann 2012Þ—the effect of immigrant population concentration on earnings is different at American Journal of Sociology 58 different stages in the life course, which may partially account for the rather small effects of immigrant population concentration on labor market out- comes for native-born workers that are typically reported in the literature. With cross-sectional data, point-of-entry effects are inseparable from, and thus conflated with, the estimation of contemporaneous effects, andbecause the point-of-entry effects are in a positive direction, their omission from cross-sectional analyses likely causes the negative contemporaneous point estimates to be biased downward. In this area of research it is important to consider the effects of immi- grant population concentration on the subpopulations that are most likely to be negatively affected by foreign-born competition.11 Because foreign- born workers tend to have lower levels of education ðon averageÞ relative to natives, poorly educated natives are more likely to be substituted for by foreign-born workers than are highly educated natives, and this may be particularly true for less educated African-Americans. Additionally, some people may respond to high levels of immigration by moving to a differ- ent local labor market, whereas nonmobile natives are more likely to face competition from foreign-born workers. For these reasons, models 5 and 6 provide a comparison of the effects between less educated nonmovers and less educated movers. Nonmovers are those who have remained in their ini- tial local labor market for the duration of the study period. Movers are those who have moved at least once from their local labor market after initially entering the labor force. The estimates of key interest for less educated nonmovers in model 5 are indeed much larger than in model 4. The negative contemporaneous effect on earnings at age 40 is 5.8 times greater in model 5 ðb5 2:173 vs. b5 21:178Þ than in model 4, and the negative contemporaneous effect ðb5 2:132Þ on earnings growth is no longer trivial when compared to the initial estimate ðb5 2:012Þ in model 2. If the foreign-born population increased by one percentage point per year ðwhich was the case for some local labor markets during the 1990sÞ, the rate of earnings growth among those with a high school education or less that never moved from their point-of-entry community would be reduced by approximately .13 of a percent annually ðe.g., from 3.0% annual earnings growth to 2.87% earnings growth to 2.74% growth, etc.Þ. It is interesting that these larger negative contemporaneous effects re- ported in model 5 are almost equally matched by larger point-of-entry ef- fects. Compared to model 4, the positive point-of-entry effect on earnings 11In a supplementary analysis, the contemporaneous effect of % foreign born on earn- ings growth is significantly stronger among women ðb52:06052:02612:034Þ rel- ative to men ðb52:026Þ. I maintain the pooled models because the pattern of effects for men and women ði.e., positive point-of-entry effects and negative contemporaneous effectsÞ are the same. Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 59 at age 40 is approximately 35% larger in model 5, and the positive point-of- entry effect on earnings growth is about 1.3 times larger. It appears those most likely to be negatively affected by immigration ðless educated non- moversÞ also experience long-term positive effects from entering the labor force in high immigrant concentration areas. The same pattern also holds for a non-Hispanic black subpopulation of nonmovers with less than a high school education ðresults not shownÞ. In model 6 of table 4, the effects for those less educated respondents that did move from their initial local labor market are smaller in magnitude than for the less educated nonmovers. Yet, the positive point-of-entry effects on earnings ðb5 :554Þ and earnings growth ðb5 :026Þ remain statistically sig- nificant. The negative contemporaneous effects are no longer statistically significant. From model 6 it appears that less educated movers retain some of the initial benefit of entering the labor force in an area of high immi- grant concentration while avoiding the negative contemporaneous effects on earnings and earnings growth via migration. Overall, the analysis in table 4 provides no support for the claim that immigrant competition impedes chances for upward socioeconomic mo- bility by limiting entry-level opportunities for native-born young adults. Indeed, we find just the opposite: a robust and positive point-of-entry effect of immigrant population concentration on earnings and earnings growth. This is true even among those who are most likely to be in direct and pro- longed competition with foreign-born workers—less educated and non- mobile natives. These positive point-of-entry effects suggest that young adults adjust to large foreign-born populations in their local labor market in ways that place them on a career path that is socioeconomically benefi- cial over the long run. At the same time, however, this study also finds a consistent negative contemporaneous effect of immigrant population concentration on earnings growth. This finding is partially consistent with previous research indicating that foreign-born workers substitute for native workers. Unlike previous research, however, the positive point-of-entry effects coupled with the neg- ative contemporaneous effects suggests a more complex process than simple labor substitution. What accounts for this pattern? The negative contemporaneous effect observed here for native-born work- ers does not need to come from direct competition with foreign-bornworkers. Instead, older native-born birth cohorts may compete with younger native- born birth cohorts that sequentially enter the labor force in search of better jobs in areas of high immigrant concentration. This cross cohort competition may occur because each new cohort adjusts to an increasing level of immi- grant population concentration by avoiding “immigrant work” and finding “appropriate”work higher up the occupational hierarchy. Over time a steady supply of young native-born workers seeking better career avenues creates American Journal of Sociology 60 downward pressure on earnings for older cohorts currently occupying those jobs. This interpretation is based on the idea of an inflationary process whereby young native-born workers in areas of high immigrant concentra- tion are willing or able to consider only jobs above a certain status thresh- old—one that varies with the relative size of the foreign-born population. There is greater competition for midrange employment opportunities— especially among less educated natives—because the “social minimum” among natives in these areas is higher than in areas with relatively few foreign-born workers. In effect, immigration induces a structural inflation of the occupational hierarchy among native workers, and the results here reveal the unanticipated consequences that this form of inflationary be- havior causes. This inflationary process should be considered a viable al- ternative to the mechanism of direct competition that is typically credited with generating substitution effects. The sensitivity analysis for endoge- neity bias and the analysis of occupational mobility in the following sec- tions support this premise. Sensitivity Analysis for Endogeneity Bias In any observational study of contextual effects there is the potential for endogeneity bias. There can be a number of factors causing the focal mea- sure of immigrant population concentration to be correlated with the er- ror term, thus inducing bias and inconsistency into the estimates. This study has already discussed two potential sources of endogeneity via selective migration and the annual selection of natives into employment status. Al- though the analyses above attempt to remedy and assess these issues, there is the potential for other latent sources of endogeneity stemming from the omission of important variables or from measurement error, among other factors ðsee Bollen 2012Þ. Additionally, there is the concern that the level of exposure to immigrant population concentration in young adulthood may influence several time-varying behaviors throughout the life course. Because the analysis presented in table 4 includes time-varying behaviors as covariates, it may essentially control away some of the important im- migration effects it seeks to estimate. This will induce bias into the results as well. This section provides two supplemental analyses that address these endogeneity concerns. The first supplementary analysis employs inverse probability weighting ðRobins 1999Þ to remove the observed confounding that lies on the causal pathway between foreign-born population concentration at one time and earnings at another time. The central aim of this approach is to produce a “marginal structural model” that recovers the marginal causal effects ðhere- after, marginal effectsÞ. Marginal effects are designed to capture the total ef- Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 61 fect of foreign-born concentration on earnings by incorporating the influ- ence of foreign-born concentration on time-varying factors that also influ- ence earnings ðe.g., future school enrollment, probability of unemployment, duration of residence, and othersÞ. Because people respond to foreign-born competition in various ways, the effects reported in table 4 may be obscured to some degree by these time-varying behaviors. Yet, the variables that lie on the causal pathway are also potential confounders that need to be con- trolled. Inverse probability weighting addresses this two-sided issue. Fol- lowing the procedures of Wodtke, Harding, and Elwert ð2011Þ, contempo- raneous immigrant population concentration is divided evenly into quintiles and predicted probabilities are attained for the construction of the weights via an ordered logistic regression. A stable version of the inverse probabil- ity weights is then constructed using predicted probabilities based on all the time-invariant covariates in the numerator and using predicted proba- bilities based on all time-invariant and time-varying covariates in the de- nominator. The weights range from a minimum of .62 to a maximum of 2.24 with a mean of 1.01. Race, ethnicity, gender, and age are deterministic and are included in the earnings model equation along with the focal mea- sures for foreign-born population concentration. The marginal effects appear in model 1 of table 5. The supplementary analyses are designed to be comparable to the effects of foreign-born pop- ulation concentration reported in model 4 of table 4. There are two note- worthy findings. First, the negative contemporaneous effect of foreign- born concentration on earnings at age 40 and earnings growth are larger in the supplemental analysis than in the original ðtable 4Þ analysis ðb5 2:393 vs. b52:173; b52:103 vs. b5 2:041Þ. Second, the positive point- of-entry effects are only modestly modified after employing the inverse probability weights: we still observe a positive and robust point-of-entry effect on earnings at age 40 and on earnings growth. The positive point- of-entry effect on earnings growth is slightly attenuated ðb5 :025 vs. b5 :030Þ, but this is offset by the larger positive point-of-entry effect on earn- ings at age 40 ðb5 1:193 vs. b5 :750Þ. Thus, although time-varying re- actions of natives in response to immigration appear to influence their career trajectories to some degree, it is also clear that there is an indepen- dent point-of-entry effect of foreign-born population concentration on the career paths of natives. The second supplementary analysis employs an instrumental variable approach ðvia two-stage least squares, or 2SLSÞ. The advantage of an in- strumental variable approach is its ability to address endogeneity bias stemming from unobserved confounding. The validity of this approach, however, depends heavily on the quality of the instruments. The two in- struments employed for foreign-born population concentration at the point of entry are the number of Hispanic arrests and the number of Asian ar- American Journal of Sociology 62 rests in 1980 for the county of residence of the respondent when that worker entered the labor market. The data come from the FBI’s 1980 Uni- formCrimeReports ðUCR; retrievable at http://www.icpsr.umich.eduÞ. The instrumented version of foreign-born population concentration at the point of entry is also used to construct the deviated measure of foreign-born pop- ulation concentration ðXið jkÞ–Zð jkÞÞ. All indications ðe.g., weak instrument tests and tests for overidentifying restrictionsÞ suggest that the instruments are strong and valid: the number of Hispanic and Asian arrests is highly correlated with the share of foreign-born concentration at point of entry— the F-test ðF5 104:6, df1 5 2; df2 5 1,197Þ is much greater than 10 and the R jumps by nine points in the first-stage model when the instruments are added to the rest of the covariates ðnot shownÞ. Conceptually it is difficult to imagine how the number of Hispanic and Asian arrests in 1980 would be in any way associated independently ði.e., conditional on population size and the share of foreign-bornÞwith individuals’ earnings 20-plus years later. TABLE 5 Supplementary Analyses of the Contemporaneous and Point-of-Entry Effects of Immigrant Population Concentration on Earnings and Earnings Growth, NLSY79 MODEL 7a MODEL 8b FIXED EFFECTS b SE b SE Effects on hourly earnings at age 40 % foreign-born at entry: Z0ð jkÞ. . . . 1.193 .141*** 1.523 .245*** % foreign-born: ðXiðjkÞ-Z0ð jkÞÞ . . . . . 2.393 .103*** 2.313 .104 ** Effects on earnings growth % foreign-born at entry: Z0ð jkÞ. . . . .025 .007*** .083 .009*** % foreign-born: ðXið jkÞ-Z0 ð jkÞÞ . . . . 2.103 .005*** 2.043 .005*** a Model 7 ðmarginal effectsÞ: Employs stabilized inverse probability weights from an or- dered logistic regression of immigrant population concentration divided evenly into quintiles. Stabilized weights are attained by using predicted probabilities based on all the time-invariant covariates in the numerator and using predicted probabilities based on all time-invariant and time-varying covariates in the denominator. Race, ethnicity, gender, and age are included as covariates in this model. b Model 8 ðinstrumental variables, 2SLSÞ: The instruments are the number of Hispanic arrests and the number of Asian arrests in 1980 for the county of residence of the respondent when they entered the labor market ðweak instrument test: F 5 104.6, df1 5 2; df2 5 1197; Sargan-Hansen statistic for overidentifying restrictions x2 5 1:708, df 5 1, P 5 .191Þ. Covari- ates include marital status, number of children, enrolled in school, level of education, second- generation status, parental education, whether respondent grew up in an intact household, num- ber of siblings, whether respondent is an only child or firstborn sibling, whether respondent is the youngest sibling, AFQT, residential duration;% employed in manufacturing,% employed in high-end service,% employed in low-end service,% employed in government, population sizeðlnÞ, unemployment rate, median family income,% non-Hispanic black. * P < .05. ** P < .01. *** P < .001. Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 63 This exogeneity assumption is supported by a test for overidentifying re- strictions. According to the Sargan-Hansen statistic for overidentifying re- strictions ðx2 5 1:708, df 5 1, P 5 .191Þ that accounts for the clustered na- ture of the data, the null hypothesis of exogenous instruments is upheld. Thus, there is conceptual and empirical support for strength and validity of the instruments. The coefficients and the proper standard errors corrected for the 2SLS process ðWooldridge 2002, pp. 91,95Þ appear next to the marginal effects in table 5 under model 8. The pattern of effects in model 8 closely mirrors the pattern of effects in table 4, model 4: we continue to observe positive point- of-entry effects on earnings at age 40 and earnings growth, and the in- strumented effects are actually larger in magnitude than the potentially biased effects in table 4 ðb5 1:523 vs. b5 :750; b5 :083 vs. b5 :030Þ. The negative contemporaneous effects reported here are similar to the original effects reported in table 4 ðb52:313 vs. b5 2:173; b52:043 vs. b5 2:041Þ. Together, these sensitivity checks provide confidence that the conclusions drawn from the study’s main analyses are not distorted by en- dogeneity bias. These supplemental results continue to underscore the im- portance of studying the changing structure of labor market opportunities for young adults when assessing the effects of immigration on the earnings of native-born workers. A CAREER TRAJECTORY ANALYSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ATTAINMENT Pay differences are modest early in workers’ careers, and using dollars as a metric does not provide the most precise yardstick for determining how contextual factors affect employment outcomes among young adults. Dif- ferences in occupational standing, on the other hand, provide an intuitive and arguably a more meaningful metric from which to gauge how contex- tual factors affect young adults at this critical period in their careers. The following analysis uses occupational status scores to provide valuable in- sights into the importance of job search environments for young adults and to evaluate how these early career choices and opportunities are affected by immigrant population concentration. For conceptual and methodological reasons, there are several minor modifications to the specification used to model occupational status tra- jectories. Unlike the earnings trajectorymodels—which focused on average earnings at age 40—the focus here is on the occupational standing of the respondent’s initial job choice at the point-of-entry into the labor market. In comparison to the model specification for earnings trajectories ðmodel specification ½6 aboveÞ, a key difference is the necessary constraint on the b04ðXið jkÞ–Z0ð jkÞÞ parameter when the time point is zero. This constraint is American Journal of Sociology 64 necessary because at the year of labor force entry the contemporaneous effect is the point-of-entry effect for that year. The following composite form specification is the cross-classified multi- level growth-curve model used to study occupational status trajectories. Yi jkð Þ 5 b00 1 b01ðyear entryijÞ1 b02ðZ 0 ð jkÞÞ1 b03ðZ 0 ð jkÞ  year entryijÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} fixed effects 1 b04ðXið jkÞ 2 Z 0 ð jkÞ  year entryijÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} fixed effects 1 z0j 1 z1jðyear entryijÞ1 u0k 1 ε ið jkÞ|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{zfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl} random effects ð7Þ In specification model ð7Þ, “year_entry” is substituted for “age40.” “Year_entry” corresponds to the number of years since the respondent en- tered the labor market after completing school. Operationally, the point of entry for the occupational trajectory models is the same as in the earnings trajectory models. The difference is that the measure of time is now cen- tered at the year of entry ðinstead of at age 40Þ. Similar to the specification of model ð6Þ, model specification ð7Þ allows the rate of occupational mobility to be influenced by both the point-of-entry effect b03ðZ0ð jkÞ  year entryijÞ and the contemporaneous effect b04ðXið jkÞ 2 Z0ð jkÞ  year entryijÞ. The inter- cept, however, now refers to the level of occupational status when year of entry is zero, allowing us to closely assess how immigrant population con- centration affects occupational standing at that time point. Again, all other continuous variables in the model are grand-mean centered. There are two other minor changes to the occupational mobility models. First, in addition to the same control variables used in the analysis of earn- ings, the occupational mobility models include a time-invariant variable for the age of the respondent in 1979. Second, there is a difference in the func- tional form between earnings growth and occupational mobility. The func- tional form for occupational mobility is curvilinear because occupational mobility increases at a decreasing rate over time. To account for this curvi- linear association, the models for occupational mobility include a squared term for years since labor-market entry. Table 6 provides the gender specific results froma series of cross-classified multilevel growth-curve models of occupational status attainment. In model 9, men experience a statistically significant .117 of a percentage point bump to their occupational standing upon entry into the labor force for ev- ery one percentage point increase in foreign-born population concentration. According to the same model estimated separately for women, women ex- perience a more modest bump of .103 of a percentage point increase for ev- ery one percentage point increase of foreign-born population at the time of entry into the labor force. These positive effects on occupational standing upon entry into the labor market support the premise that the occupational choices and opportunities among young native-born adults are better in ar- eas with high concentrations of foreign-born population. ð7Þ Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 65 Model 9 in table 6 also provides estimates of the point-of-entry effect and the contemporaneous effect of immigrant population concentration on the rate of occupational mobility. For women, we observe a negative point-of- entry effect ðb52:008Þ from the level of foreign-born population concen- tration on the rate of occupational mobility. This negative point-of-entry effect among women suggests that there are structural limits to women’s occupational mobility that are connected to the types of occupations avail- able to them upon entry into the labor market in areas of high immigrant concentration. Thus, although young women attain higher-status jobs ini- tially in areas marked by high levels of immigration, those initial jobs pro- vide less room for further occupational advancement. TABLE 6 Cross-Classified Multilevel Growth-Curve Estimates of the Contemporaneous and Point-of-Entry Effects of Immigrant Population Concentration on Occupational Status and Mobility MODEL 9 MODEL 10 MODEL 11 MODEL 12 OCCUPATIONAL EFFECTS b SE b SE b SE b SE Men: Status at entry into the labor force: % foreign-born at entry: Z0ð jkÞ . . . . . .117 .047** .118 .052* .153 .052** .138 .099 Mobility: % foreign-born at entry: Z0ð jkÞ . . . . . .005 .008 .004 .003 .004 .003 2.001 .004 % foreign born: ðXið jkÞ-Z0ð jkÞÞ . . . . . 2.004 .002 2.003 .003 2.007 .002** .003 .002 Women: Status at entry into the labor force: % foreign-born at entry: Z0ð jkÞ . . . . . .103 .049* .151 .053*** .239 .052*** .008 .104 Mobility: % foreign-born at entry: Z0ð jkÞ . . . . . 2.008 .003** 2.009 .004* 2.008 .003** 2.015 .005** % foreign-born: ðXiðjkÞ-Z0ð jkÞÞ . . . . . 2.001 .003 2.004 .004 2.004 .003 .004 .002 NOTE.—All models include as covariates marital status, number of children, enrolled in school, level of education, second generation status, parental education, whether respondent grew up in an intact household, number of siblings, whether respondent is an only child or first born sibling, whether respondent is the youngest sibling, AFQT, residential duration, age of respondent in 1979, years since entry squared,% employed in manufacturing, % employed in high-end service, % employed in low-end service, % employed in government, population sizeðlnÞ, unemployment rate, median family income,% non-Hispanic black. Model 11 utilizes stabilized inverse probability weights as in table 5, model 7. Model 12 utilizes instrumental variables as in table 5, model 8. * P < .05. ** P < .01. *** P < .001. American Journal of Sociology 66 Further empirical support for this pattern of effects is gained by compar- ing the coefficients from model 9 for both men and women with the coeffi- cients from table 6, model 10, which shows the results for those respondents that have a high school education or less. The pattern of effects is similar be- tween the full sample and the subsample of less educated respondents, al- though the positive point-of-entry effect on initial occupational standing and the negative point-of-entry effect on occupational mobility appear slightly stronger in magnitude among less educated women than among women in general. From these analyses, and from the results in the previous section, it does not appear that only those with higher levels of education benefit from entering the labor market in highly concentrated immigrant areas. Rather, less educated natives appear to benefit as well, at least initially. In addition to the supplemental analyses of the earnings models, a paral- lel set of supplemental analyses is conducted on the occupational status models. As shown in table 6, the marginal effects in model 11 concur with model 9, but there are two caveats with the supplemental instrumental var- iable analysis in model 12 that deserve mention. First, for men the point estimate for the point-of-entry effect ðb5 :138Þ is larger in the 2SLS model than the original ðb5 :117Þ, but the effect is not statistically significant from zero because of the loss of efficiency stemming from the instrumental vari- able approach ði.e., by construction the instrumental variable standard errors are always larger than the original standard errorsÞ. Second, for women the point estimate for the point-of-entry effect ðb5 :008Þ is much smaller in the 2SLS model than in the original ðb5 :103Þ. The point-of-entry estimate in the 2SLS model for women is likely being affected by the important but un- observed decision many women face in forgoing career aspirations to raise a family. This decision is of course related to occupational attainment over the life course and is also likely related to the level of immigrant population concentration in young adulthood via the structure of employment oppor- tunities for women and their spouses ðor future spousesÞ upon entry into the labor market. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION Using over a quarter of a century of longitudinal data from the 1979 Na- tional Longitudinal Survey of Youth, this study provides an analysis of how people’s career trajectories are influenced by exposure to different lo- cal levels of immigrant population concentration. Stratification researchers have emphasized for quite some time how opportunities early in life have important effects on people’s careers ðBlau and Duncan 1967; Wiley 1967; Spilerman 1977Þ. Yet researchers continue to know little about how local labor market characteristics—like immigrant population concentration— affect the career paths of young adults. This research provides a novel in- Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 67 sight into how people’s career trajectories are affected by the job choices and the employment opportunities available to them when first entering the labor market in highly concentrated immigrant areas. The career trajectory analysis in this research uses a cross-classified mul- tilevel estimator in conjunction with an innovative time-centered coding technique ðSinger and Willett 2003Þ. This approach decomposes the effects of immigrant population concentration into its respective point-of-entry ef- fect ði.e., between-individual effectÞ and contemporaneous effect ði.e., within- individual effectÞ. As a result, this study discovers ðaÞ heterogeneous effects of the impact of immigrant population concentration on native workers ðcf. Xie et al. 2012Þ and ðbÞ evidence of both substitution and complemen- tary effects of immigration on native workers. These main discoveries contribute substantively to the study of immi- gration effects and have the following implications. First, contrary to the claim that immigrant competition impedes chances for upward socioeco- nomic mobility by limiting entry-level opportunities for young adults ðsee explicit hypothesis 1, table 1Þ, this research finds a robust positive point-of- entry effect of immigrant population concentration on earnings over the course of a career and on occupational status of young adults as they enter the labor market. This finding is true after controlling for wide array of relevant individual- and community-level factors, and it holds for those most likely to be in direct competition with foreign-born labor, namely, less educated as well as geographically immobile native workers. These posi- tive point-of-entry effects affirm the idea that young adults adjust to large foreign-born populations in their local labor market by finding career ave- nues that are socioeconomically beneficial over the long run ðsee explicit hy- pothesis 2, table 1Þ. Yet, this study also finds a persistent negative contemporaneous effect of immigrant population concentration on the annual rate of earnings growth. This finding is consistent with previous research indicating how foreign- born workers are substitutes for native workers ðe.g., Reed and Danziger 2007Þ. Moving beyond previous work, however, the decomposition of the effect of immigrant population concentration into its respective point-of- entry effect and contemporaneous effect reveals heterogeneous effects that are unaccounted for in this extensive area of research. By accounting for the positive point-of-entry effects, the negative contemporaneous effect of immigrant population concentration on earnings growth is approximately 2.3 times greater in magnitude than in the model that excludes point-of- entry effects ðtable 4Þ. This finding can at least partly explain the rather small point-estimates typically observed in immigration effects research. Second, a more complex process than simple immigrant substitution comes to light when we consider the negative contemporaneous effects to- gether with the positive point-of-entry effects. The explanation adopted for American Journal of Sociology 68 this research points to an inflationary process whereby young native-born workers in highly concentrated immigrant areas only consider, or have in- formation about, jobs above a certain status threshold—a status threshold that varies with the relative size of the foreign-born population. This in- flationary process in turn generates greater competition among natives. In other words, it is not that foreign-born workers are necessarily competing directly with native-born workers for the same jobs. Instead, high levels of immigration are likely altering the local labor market in ways that increase competition among native workers occupying ðor striving to occupyÞ the middle and upper rungs of the occupational hierarchy. This raises pro- vocative questions about whether foreign-born workers need to be in direct competition with native workers for there to be substitution effects. Third, the positive point-of-entry effects suggest that individuals who would otherwise be content with a high school education ðor lessÞmay find themselves staying in school or seeking additional training when contem- plating employment in areas with high immigrant concentration. There- fore, the native skill composition of any particular educational/occupational grouping may have been affected as immigration increased throughout the United States during the 1980s and 1990s. This means that the observation of a growing substitution effect of immigration on native-born high school dropouts over time—a finding that is now common in time-series analyses— may be attributed to a lower, unobserved skill set among today’s high school dropouts compared to dropouts 20 or 30 years ago ði.e., a cohort effectÞ. Caution should be given to simply comparing contemporaneous skill-set matches among native- and foreign-born workers because the educational/ occupational choices of young native-born adults, and the unobserved skills within those groups, are likely endogenous to the level of immigration. There is ongoing debate in the literature about who among the foreign-born and native-born populations are equivalent substitutes over time ðe.g., Borjas, Grogger, and Hanson; 2008 Ottaviano and Peri 2012Þ, and this research adds another level of complexity that should be of substantive value to re- searchers. Fourth, a clear implication of these findings is the importance it places on where people start their careers during a period of mass immigration. Among those entering the labor force and remaining in immigrant gateway cities—areas marked by high levels of immigrant population concentration at the beginning of the study period and high levels of immigrant popula- tion growth in the preceding decades—the initial bump in occupational standing is likely enough to compensate for any negative contemporaneous effects ðalthough competition with younger, native-born birth cohorts in these areas could jeopardize job stability for some older, native-born work- ersÞ. On the other hand, among those transitioning into the labor force in new immigrant destination areas—areas that started the era with low levels Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 69 of immigrant population concentration but experienced high levels of immi- grant population growth over the last several decades—the positive point-of- entry effects likely failed to materialize while the negative contemporaneous effects may still be very much felt. For many members of this mid-20th- century birth cohort, labor force entry occurred before significant levels of immigration began to affect these new immigrant destinations. Therefore, the motivation, foresight, and opportunity for young, native-born workers living in these areas to make the types of career choices that would isolate them from future ðdirectÞ competitionwith foreign-born labormayhavebeen lacking. As a result, by age 40, many of these native workers have accumu- lated years of experience working in the types of industries and occupations that now rely heavily on immigrant labor. Finally, this study had to deal with data limitations and several endog- eneity challenges. Significant effort went into ensuring the results were not unduly affected by these issues, but biased estimates could still be a prob- lem. Holding constant native educational attainment and native migra- tion experiences together with efforts to estimate marginal effects and to purge estimates of biaswith instrumental variables shouldminimize concern. Additional steps were also taken to limit bias with a Heckman correction for the potential selection into native unemployment caused by immigration, al- though the exclusion restriction on the Heckman correction is questionable. Regardless of the supplemental analysis undertaken, the general pattern of effects reported in the main analyses hold true. These methodological efforts aside, a life course approach to studying local labor market effects is in a nascent stage; more work is needed to establish generalizability beyond the NLSY79 cohort and to advance this general area of research. For instance, an important objective of future re- search will be to account for any location-specific changes in the education and skill level of the foreign-born population ðe.g., Hall et al. 2011Þ. This research reasonably assumes that the large majority of foreign-born work- ers in the United States during the 1980s and 1990s had low levels of for- mal education. Young native-born adults entering the labor market today may face a different supply of foreign-born labor. Changes to the skill com- position of foreign-born workers in the United States could be an important explanatory variable when comparing the effects of immigrant population concentration across different birth cohorts in different time periods.12 Fu- 12For a limited sample of NLSY79 respondents living only in metropolitan areas, I conducted a supplementary analysis of ðaÞ the effects of the percentage of those without high school degrees that are foreign born on the earnings trajectories of native workers that have a high school education or less, and ðbÞ the effects of the percentage of those with college degrees that are foreign born on the earnings trajectories of native workers that have more than a high school education. The point-of-entry effects of the percent- age of the college educated population that is foreign born on natives with greater than American Journal of Sociology 70 ture research shouldalso explore the role of other location- andperiod-specific factors that may affect the status threshold for which young native workers begin to experience inflationary pressure on their occupational choices and opportunities. These and other avenues for advancing our understanding of the importance of local labor markets in shaping career trajectories will benefit from a close examination of relevant factors, like immigrant popula- tion concentration, at different stages in the life course. REFERENCES Abowd, John M., and Richard B. Freeman, eds. 1991. Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Alba, Richard D., and Victor Nee. 2003. Remaking the American Mainstream: As- similation and Contemporary Immigration. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Baayen, R. H., D. J. Davidson, and D. M. Bates. 2008. “Mixed-Effects Modeling with Crossed Random Effects for Subjects and Items.” Journal of Memory and Language 59:390–412. Bates, Douglas. 2005. “Fitting Linear Mixed Models in R.” R News 5:27–30. Bernhardt, Annette, Martina Morris, Mark S. Handcock, and Marc A. Scott. 2001. Divergent Paths: Economic Mobility in the New American Labor Market.NewYork: Russell Sage. Black, Timothy. 2009. When a Heart Turns Rock Solid: The Lives of Three Puerto Rican Brothers On and Off the Streets. New York: Pantheon. Blau, Peter M., and Otis Dudley Ducan. 1967. The American Occupational Structure. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Bollen, Kenneth A. 2012. “Instrumental Variables in Sociology and the Social Sciences.” Annual Review of Sociology 38 ð1Þ: 37–72. Borjas, George J. 1983. “The Substitutability of Black, Hispanic, and White Labor.” Economic Inquiry 21:93–106. ———. 1987. “Immigrants, Minorities, and Labor Market Competition.” Industrial and Labor Relations 40:382–92. ———. 1999. Heaven’s Door: Immigration Policy and the American Economy. Prince- ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ———. 2006. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigra- tion.” Journal of Human Resources 41 ð2Þ: 221–58. Borjas, George J., Jeffrey Grogger, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2008. “Imperfect Sub- stitution between Immigrants and Natives: A Reappraisal.” NBER Working Paper No. 13887. Cambridge, Mass. Briggs, Vernon, M. 1993. “Immigrant Labor and the Issue of ‘Dirty Work’ in Advanced Industrial Societies.” Population and Environment 14 ð6Þ: 503–14. high school educations are much smaller than those shown in table 4, model 4 and are not statistically significant. This finding suggests that greater levels of educated foreign- born workers may hinder the earnings of more highly educated natives by possibly blocking their entry into more lucrative career paths. The pattern of effects of the less educated foreign-born population on less educated natives is similar to table 4, model 4. Readers should view these findings with caution, as the skill composition among native workers may have been affected by exposure to immigration in the first place, as noted in the conclusion of this article. Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 71 Butcher, Kristin F., and David Card. 1991. “Immigration and Wages: Evidence from the 1980s.” American Economic Review 81:292–96. Card, David. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43:245–57. ———. 2001. “Immigration Inflows, Native Outflows and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19 ð1Þ: 22–64. ———. 2005. “Is the New Immigration Really So Bad?” Economic Journal 115: 300–323. Carneiro, Pedro, James J. Heckman, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2005. “Labor Market Discrimination and Racial Differences in Premarket Factors.” Journal of Law and Economics 48:1–39. Enchautegui, Maria E. 1995. “Effects of Immigrants on the 1980–1990 U.S. Wage Experience.” Contemporary Economic Policy 13:20–38. Fischer, Claude S., Michael Hout, Martín Sánchez-Jankowski, Samuel R. Lucus, Ann Swidler, and Kim Voss. 1996. Inequality by Design: Cracking the Bell Curve Myth. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Fix, Michael, and Jeffrey S. Passel. 1994. Immigration and Immigrants: Setting the Rec- ord Straight.Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press. Frey, William. 1995. “Immigration Impacts on Internal Migration of the Poor: 1990 Census Evidence for U.S. States.” International Journal of Population Geography 1 ð1Þ: 51–67. ———. 1999. “New Black Migration Patterns in the United States: Are They Affected by Recent Immigration?” Pp. 311–44 in Immigration and Opportunity, edited by Frank D. Bean and Stephanie Bell-Rose. New York: Sage. Fuller, Sylvia. 2008. “Job Mobility and Wage Trajectories for Men and Women in the United States.” American Sociological Review 73:158–83. Grossman, Jean Baldwin. 1982. “The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in Production.” Review of Economics and Statistics 64:596–603. Halaby, Charles. 2003. “Where Job Values Come from: Family and Schooling Back- ground,CognitiveAbility, andGender.”AmericanSociological Review 68 ð2Þ: 251–78. ———. 2004. “Panel Models in Sociological Research: Theory into Practice.” Annual Review of Sociology 30:507–44. Hall, Matthew, and George Farkas. 2008. “Does Human Capital Raise Earnings for Immigrants in the Low-Skill Labor Market?” Demography 45:619–40. Hall, Matthew, Audrey Singer, Deborah Graefe, and Gordon De Jong. 2011. “The Geography of Immigrant Skills: Educational Inequality across Metropolitan Desti- nations.” State of Metropolitan America report series. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution. Jaret, Charles, Lesley Williams Reid, and Robert M. Adelman. 2003. “Black-White Income Inequality and Metropolitan Socioeconomic Structure.” Journal of Urban Affairs 25:305–33. Johnson-Webb, Karen. 2002. “Employer Recruitment and Hispanic Labor Migration: North Carolina Urban Areas at the End of the Millennium.” Professional Geographer 54 ð3Þ: 406–21. Kandel, William, and Emilio Parrado. 2005. “Restructuring of the U.S. Meat Processing Industry and New Hispanic Migrant Destinations.” Population and Development Review 31 ð3Þ: 447–72. Kritz, Mary M., and Douglas T. Gurak 2001. “The Impact of Immigration on the In- ternal Migration of Natives and Immigrants.” Demography 38 ð1Þ: 133–45. Light, Ivan, and C. Rosenstein. 1995. Race, Ethnicity, and Entrepreneurship in Urban America. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Linton, April. 2002. “Immigration and the Structure of Demand: Do Immigrants Alter the Labor Market Composition of U.S. Cities?” International Immigration Review 36 ð1Þ: 58–80. American Journal of Sociology 72 MacLeod, Jay. 2009. Ain’t No Makin’ It: Aspirations and Attainment in a Low-Income Neighborhood. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. Massey, Douglas S., Jorge Durand, and Nolan J. Malone. 2002. Beyond Smoke and Mirrors: Mexican Immigration in an Era of Economic Integration. New York: Rus- sell Sage Foundation. McCall, Leslie. 2001. “Sources of Racial Wage Inequality in Metropolitan Labor Markets: Racial, Ethnic, and Gender Differences.” American Sociological Review 66:520–41. Muller, Thomas. 1993. Immigrants and the American City. New York: New York Uni- versity Press. Nam, Charles B., and Monica Boyd. 2004. “Occupational Status in 2000: Over a Century of Census-Based Measurement.” Population Research and Policy Review 23:327–58. Okkerse, Liesbet. 2008. “How to Measure Labor Market Effects of Immigration: A Review.” Journal of Economic Surveys 22:1–30. Orrenius, PiaM., andMadeline Zavodny. 2009. “Do ImmigrantsWork in Riskier Jobs?” Demography 46:535–51. Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri. 2006. “The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence from U.S. Cities.” Journal of Economic Geography 6:9–44. ———. 2012. “Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on Wages.” Journal of the Euro- pean Economic Association 10 ð1Þ: 152–97. Pedace, Roberto. 2006. “Immigration, Labor Market Mobility, and the Earnings of Native-BornWorkers: An Occupational Segmentation Approach.” American Journal of Economics and Sociology 65:313–45. Piore, Michael. 1979. Birds of Passage: Migrant Labor and Industrial Societies. Cam- bridge, Mass.: Cambridge University Press. Raftery, Adrian. E. 1995. “Bayesian Model Selection in Social Research.” Sociological Methodology 25:111–63. Rasbash, Jon, and William Browne. 2008. “Modeling Non-Hierarchical Structures.” Pp. 301–34 in Handbook of Multilevel Analysis, edited by Jan de Leeuw and Erik Meijer. New York: Springer. Raudenbush, Stephen W., and Anthony S. Bryk. 2002. Hierarchical Linear Models: Applications and Data Analysis Methods, 2d ed. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage. Reed, Deborah, and Sheldon Danziger. 2007. “The Effects of Recent Immigration on Racial/Ethnic Labor Market Differentials.” American Economic Review 97 ð2Þ: 373–77. Reimers, Cordelia W. 1998. “Unskilled Immigration and Changes in the Wage Dis- tributions of Black, Mexican American, and Non-Hispanic White Male Dropouts.” Pp. 107–48 in Help or Hindrance? The Economic Implications of Immigration for African Americans, edited by Daniel S. Hamermesh and Frank D. Bean. New York: Russell Sage. Robins, James M. 1999. “Association, Causation, and Marginal Structural Models.” Synthese 121:151–79. Rosenfeld, Rachel. 1980. “Race and Sex Differences in Career Dynamics.” American Sociological Review 45 ð4Þ: 583–609. Singer, Judith D., and John B. Willett. 2003. Applied Longitudinal Data Analysis: Modeling Change and Event Occurrence. New York: Oxford University Press. Smith, James P., and Barry Edmonston. 1997. The New Americans: Economic, Demo- graphic, and Fiscal Effects of Immigration.Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. Sørensen, Aage B. 1975. “The Structure of Intragenerational Mobility.” American So- ciological Review 40 ð4Þ: 456–71. Spiegelhalter, David J., Nicola G. Best, Bradley P. Carlin, and Angelika van der Linde. 2002. “Bayesian Measures of Model Complexity and Fit” ðwith discussionÞ. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, ser. B ðStatistical MethodologyÞ 64 ð4Þ: 583–639. Effects of Immigration on Career Trajectories of Native Workers 73 Spilerman, Seymour. 1977. “Careers, Labor Market Structure, and Socioeconomic Achievement.” American Journal of Sociology 83 ð3Þ: 551–93. Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald, Melvin Thomas, and Kecia Johnson. 2005. “Race and the Accumulation of Human Capital across the Career: A Theoretical Model and Fixed- Effects Application.” American Journal of Sociology 111:58–89. Waldinger, Roger. 1996. Still the Promised City? Blacks and New Immigrants in Postindustrial New York. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. ———. 1997. “Black/Immigrant Competition Re-Assessed: New Evidence from Los Angeles.” Sociological Perspectives 40:365–85. Waldinger, Roger, and Michael I. Lichter. 2003. How the Other Half Works. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. Wang, Qingfang. 2008. “Race/Ethnicity, Gender and Job Earnings across Metropolitan Areas in the United States: A Multilevel Analysis.” Urban Studies 45:825–43. Warren, John R., Jennifer T. Sheridan, and Robert M. Hauser. 1998. “Choosing a Measure of Occupational Standing: HowUseful Are Composite Measures in Analyses of Gender Inequality in Occupational Attainment?” Sociological Methods and Re- search 27:3–76. White, Michael J., and Zai Liang. 1998. “The Effect of Immigration on the Internal Migration of the Native-born Population, 1981–1990.” Population Research and Policy Review 17 ð2Þ: 141–66. Wiley, Norbert. 1967. “The Ethnic Mobility Trap and Stratification Theory.” Social Problems 15 ð2Þ: 147–59. Wodtke, Geoffrey T., David J. Harding, and Felix Elwert. 2011. “Neighborhood Effects in Temporal Perspective.” American Sociological Review 76 ð5Þ: 713–36. Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Xie, Yu, Jennie Brand, and Ben Jann. 2012. “Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects with Observational Data.” Sociological Methodology 42 ð1Þ: 314–47. Zaccarin, Susanna, and Giulia Rivellini. 2002. “Multilevel Analysis in Social Research: An Application of a Cross-Classified Model.” Statistical Methods and Applications 11:95–108. Zamudio, Margaret M., and Michael I. Lichter. 2008. “Bad Attitudes and Good Sol- diers: Soft Skills as a Code for Tractability in the Hiring of Immigrant Latina/os over Native Blacks in the Hotel Industry.” Social Problems 55 ð4Þ: 573–89. Zúňiga, Victor, and Rubén Hernández-León. 2005. New Destinations: Mexican Im- migration in the United States. New York: Russell Sage. American Journal of Sociology 74 Copyright of American Journal of Sociology is the property of University of Chicago Press and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.