Usmani_AmJournSocio_2018_GJe4.pdf
aUb_iyfGcZ88_0glR1hFZnqQ4iCi-Usmani_AmJournSocio_2018_GJe4.pdf.plain.html

Democracy and the Class Struggle1 Adaner Usmani Brown University Why do societies today distribute political power more equally than before? Most scholars believe that this transition is explained by the rise of capitalism but have long disagreed about why it mattered. The author argues that dominant models fail to capture why capitalist de- velopment helps key actors win what they seek. Drawing on compar- ative and historical work, the author introduces a model of the demo- cratic transition that centers on the concept of disruptive capacity. He collects data on employment structures for much of the modern period tostudydemocratizationover thesameperiod. Incross-national regres- sions, theauthorfinds evidence that thedisruptive capacityof nonelites drives democratic gains, and thefinding that landlord capacity stymies it is reproduced. Counterfactual exercises show that slightly more than half of the democracy gap between the developing and developed world can be explained by the fact that late development bolstered landlords while handicapping nonelites. INTRODUCTION As recently as 150 years ago, ordinary individuals had little influence over the decisions that most affected their lives. Economic elites paid scant no- tice to those who tilled their fields or operated their machines. Political elites 1 I thank the many people who gave excellent feedback on drafts of this article, includ- ing Gabriel Abend, Max Besbris, Vivek Chibber, John Clegg, Paul DiMaggio, Barry Eidlin, Paula England, Jeff Goodwin, Anand Gopal, Mike Hout, Jasmine Kerrissey, Howard Kimeldorf, ErezMaggor, TaraMenon, ChristopherMuller, Suresh Naidu, Pat- rick Sharkey, the AJS reviewers, and participants in the Economic and Political Sociol- ogy workshop at New York University. All errors are my own. Direct correspondence to AdanerUsmani,Watson Institute of International and Public Affairs, BrownUniversity, 111 Thayer Street, Providence, Rhode Island 02912. E-mail: adaner_usmani@brown.edu © 2018 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0002-9602/2018/12403-0002$10.00 664 AJS Volume 124 Number 3 (November 2018): 664–704 launched wars and enacted taxes without regard for those under their writ. Nonelites were disenfranchised. Eventually these regimes crumbled. The democratic transition swept Western Europe and, over the course of the 20th century, refashioned most of theworld’s governments in its image.Democratization revolutionized au- thority, transforming subjects into citizens, autocrats into politicians, and barons into employers. Although authoritarian regimes linger, and politi- cal democracy has not eliminated inequalities of income and wealth, these changes amount to a remarkable transformation in the exercise of power. What explains democracy? In what follows, I reconsider how ordinary individuals wrested political concessions from their economic and political masters. Most work on the democratic transition begins from the observa- tion that this sea change in political life followed epochal transformations of the economy. For some, this correlation licenses the causal claim that cap- italist development has itself incubated democratic government. Classic ac- counts argue that modernization breeds democracy because it raises stan- dards of living, extends the division of labor, and transforms individual values (Lipset 1959; Cutright 1963; Welzel and Inglehart 2005). Recent scholarship has challenged this focus on what are benign and conflict-free mechanisms (Boix 2003; Acemoglu and Robinson 2006; Ansell and Samuels 2014). These authors do not dispute that democracy is endog- enous to development, but they argue that capitalism matters via the class struggle that it detonates. Specifically, development shapes patterns of in- equality,which in turn structure the contest between contending classes over the form of government. Where this struggle tilts in favor of ordinary indi- viduals, democracy is more likely. In my view, these scholars are right to object that democratization is rid- dled with conflict. They are also right to agree that it is endogenous to eco- nomic development. Other accounts may explain much that is interesting about the variation in democracy across countries and across time, but these arguments complement rather than supplant the endogenous tradition.That said, the endogenous view needs reformulating. The new inequality-based accounts have either ignored or misunderstood the conditions under which actors acquire the capacity to credibly demand (or oppose) democracy. This casts doubt on the evidence that has thus far been used to test that view. In this article, I argue that development matters because it shapes the ability of ordinary people to disrupt the routines onwhich economic and po- litical elites depend. As I argue below, these disruptive capacities determine the balance of power between elites and nonelites, which in turn shapes the character of government. Here I draw on an existing and distinct tradition, which has argued that development matters because it empowers democ- racy’s proponents and defangs its detractors (Stephens 1989; Rueschemeyer, Stephens, and Stephens 1992). Democracy and the Class Struggle 665 I make two contributions to this literature. First, I reconstruct the under- lying theory in a way that helps identify the errors of the reigning conflict- centered paradigm. Key to my formalization is the concept of disruptive ca- pacity, which helps explain why elites are more powerful than nonelites, why this balance of power shifts with economic development, andwhy these shifts usher in democracy. Second, I propose an empirical test. Existing ev- idence for the account is based mostly on case studies, several of which are contested. In fact, a recent review of the scholarship finds little quantitative evidence for what the author labels the “social forces” view (Teorell 2010, p. 101). Drawing on an original data set documenting employment structures from the 19th century to the present, spanning almost 200 countries, I sub- ject this thesis to its first adequate quantitative test. Panel regressions show significant support for the hypothesis that nonelite disruptive capacity drives democratic change, and I reproduce the well-known finding that landlord power imperils it. While the capacity-enhancing consequences of development may explain democratization, this does not mean they are the only explanation. I find some support for both the inequality-centric andmodernization arguments, as well as a diffusion-based explanation, although none of these findings are as robust asmymain results. To illustrate the political significance of the so- cial forces account, I explore howwell it explains differences in levels of de- mocracy between the advanced and developing worlds. I find that slightly more than half of this gap is explained by the structural facts that handi- capped nonelites while empowering landlords. Had capacities there accu- mulated as they did in the developed world, the 20th century would have been a remarkably more democratic time. WHY DEMOCRATIZATION? Modernization Perhaps the most well-established fact about democracy is that richer coun- tries are also more democratic. By any measure, citizens in the developed world enjoy a wider array of rights than their counterparts in the develop- ing world.2 Elections are more competitive and more regular. The rule of law is more transparent. Authority is more accountable. Whyare richer countriesmoredemocratic?According toLipset (1959), de- velopment bred democracy because it incubated a tolerantmiddle class. Ac- cording to Cutright (1963), the reasons were functional: modernization bred complexity, and this complexity demanded a correspondingly more special- ized,representativegovernment.This latteraccountcomesclosest to thetext- 2 In this paper I use the terms “developed world” and “advanced world” interchangeably and contrast this group to the “developing world” or “late developers.” American Journal of Sociology 666 book modernization view and has obvious affinities to foundational works in sociology (Parsons 1964; Durkheim 2014). More recent versions are not identical (Welzel and Inglehart 2005; Inglehart and Welzel 2010), but they share the characteristic feature of the modernization account, which is to propose that development breeds democracy by mechanisms that are rela- tively conflict-free. If the virtue of this account is to capture one of the most durable correla- tions in social science, its weakness is that the evidence in its favor is mostly correlational. The majority of quantitative evidence illustrating a link be- tween development and democracy is cross-national, but cross-national as- sociations are weak grounds for causal inference. This argument was made in detail by Robinson (2006) and Acemoglu et al. (2008, 2009), who found that the association did not survive the addition of country-level fixed ef- fects to standard models.3 While it is true that more developed countries are more democratic, they found little evidence that countries become more democratic as they developed. More recent scholarship has recovered sup- port for the impact of development on democracy by extending the sample backward in time, using newer GDP per capita data and employing more suitable estimators (Boix 2011; Benhabib, Corvalan, and Spiegel 2011; Mil- ler 2012; Murtin andWacziarg 2014; Treisman 2015). However, the overall lesson is that development itself has more complicated and less immediate consequences than previously believed. There are, of course, other mecha- nisms by which modernization might incubate democracy. In the analysis that follows Imeasure threeways inwhichmodernization is believed tomat- ter (aggregate income, educational attainment, urbanization) and find weak support for only the second of these three channels. Thisempirical issuealsobetraysatheoreticalweakness.Thetheoryhasun- derdevelopedmicrofoundations.Stapleaccountsdonotgivemuchthoughtto the actors who actually fashion or obstruct the democratic transition. Richer citizens may bemore tolerant, for instance, but they may be more interested in stabilizing a regime that raises their incomes than in democratizing it. Ed- ucation might encourage breadth of outlook, but it may also produce incen- tives to lock the less educated out of the political process. Inequality and the Class Struggle Recent work by political scientists and economists addresses this lacuna by modeling the interests andcapacities of thekeyactors in thedemocratic tran- sition. These scholars propose game-theoretic formalizations in which elites 3 Earlier, Przeworski (2000) and Przeworski and Limongi Neto (1997) showed that devel- opment predicted democratic survivalmuchmore strongly than it did transition, which is also somewhat at odds with the conventional account (Miller 2012). Democracy and the Class Struggle 667 and nonelites struggle over the organization of political authority. Each of the three dominant models predicts that it is not wealth but its distribution that determines whether democracy will flourish (Boix 2003; Acemoglu and Robinson 2006; Ansell and Samuels 2014). These authors are not the first to foreground inequality (Bollen and Jackman 1985; Muller 1988), but their work is the clearest expression of the view that it should matter. For Boix and Acemoglu and Robinson, this conclusion follows from the premise that majority-rule democracies will follow the lead of the median voter, whereas dictatorships face no such pressure (Meltzer and Richard 1981). They will thus redistribute more where inequality is higher, since there the median voter earns less than the mean. For Boix, this establishes that inequality inhibits democracy because it raises the costs of a redistrib- utive state to asset-rich elites. Acemoglu and Robinson argue that the prob- ability of transition takes the shape of an inverted U: at low inequality nonelites will realize that the costs of attempting to overthrow eliteswill out- weigh benefits gained, and at high inequality elites are more likely to dig in their heels. Democracy is thus most likely at middling levels of inequality. Both these models have been criticized by Ansell and Samuels (2014), who instead foreground intraelite competition. Ansell and Samuels model a two-sector economy in which three actors compete over control of the state, which requires them to distinguish among three types of inequality (indus- trial, landed, and intersectoral). Their flagship prediction is that industrial inequality (which theymeasure as income inequality) actuallymakes democ- racy more and not less likely, because it empowers a prodemocratic bour- geoisie (Ansell and Samuels 2014, p. 80). Landed inequality empowers land- lords, endangering democracy. Importantly, the model makes ambiguous predictions about the role of nonelites, who thus drop out of their interpre- tations of their empirical evidence.4 Thisworkhasobviousvirtues.Formalizationmandates clarity.Themod- ernization account did not carefully consider how (i.e., through whom) de- velopment led to democracy. These scholars have thus been able to propose more suitable empirical tests of their theories. For instance, both Boix and Ansell and Samuels emphasize the antidemocratic preferences of landlords. This has mandated indicators of landlord capacity, one of which I describe and employ in this article. However, while they draw attention to the actors demanding or opposing transition—to the class struggle over democracy—these accounts fail to cap- ture the circumstances under which nonelites pose a threat. Boix and Ace- 4 By their reasoning, nonelites seek full democracy (where they set policy), which can be achieved either by acting alone or by rebelling jointly with the bourgeoisie. They predict that only higher intersectoral inequality (i.e., a shift from land to industry) has unambig- uous effects on nonelite action, but in their empirical work they acknowledge no way of measuring this dimension of the resource distribution (Ansell and Samuels 2014, p. 100). American Journal of Sociology 668 moglu andRobinson assume that the capacity of nonelites to rebel (and thus win democracy) cannot be modeled. As a result, income inequality matters because it makes democracy more or less desirable, not because it shapes capacities for collective action.5 For Ansell and Samuels, inequality bears on both incentives and capacities, but collective action is a straightforward consequence of the resources actors possess. Put another way, more income, more bargaining power.6 Both of these approaches are mistaken. Others have noted this (Slater 2009; Haggard and Kaufman 2016), but my article proposes a revision that retains the view that the class struggle is endogenous to capitalist develop- ment. The ability of nonelites to act collectively is not a function of their re- sources, conventionally understood (whether absolutely or relative to elites). Collective action is not a commodity. Rather, nonelites are more likely to or- ganize when they are positioned to disrupt the routines on which elites de- pend for their wealth and power. To furnish evidence for this view, I draw on an original data set of the labor force composition of almost 200 countries over most of the modern period. Most of the evidence thus far has centered on the prediction that levels of inequality should be somehow associated with democratization (Boix 2003; Houle 2009; Soifer 2013; Ansell and Samuels 2014; Slater, Smith, and Nair 2014). But if this prediction is the result of a flawed model of the transition game, we need new or at least additional evidence. To test the conflict- centered view, we need an alternative measure based in a better theory. Capacity and the Class Struggle An earlier tradition of mostly comparative and historical scholarship ar- gued that democratization had its origins in a contest featuring elites (land- lords and industrialists) and nonelites (peasants, workers, and perhaps the middle class). Granted, there was no unanimity about the shape that this struggle took. Moore (1966) identified the democratic path to the modern world with the bourgeois revolutions (famously, “no bourgeois, no democ- racy”). These transitions (the English, the French, and the American) had disparate origins—in England, the early commercialization of agriculture weakened the aristocracy; in France and the United States, landed upper classes were decimated by revolutions—but the different paths to democ- racy were paved by competition between the classes. 5 To be clear, this is not to argue that either believe the capacity of nonelites to threaten elites is irrelevant to the probability of democratization. The point is simply that they do not model this capacity. It is given from without (as the costs of repression in Boix [2003] and the costs of revolution in Acemoglu and Robinson [2006]). 6 “A group’s likelihood of prevailing in conflict is proportional to the resources it holds” (Ansell and Samuels 2014, p. 71). Democracy and the Class Struggle 669 Stephens (1989) criticizedMoore for ignoring the role of nonelites in forg- ing democracy, a criticism that would inspire the exemplary work of this tradition: Rueschemeyer et al. (1992), which surveyed several democratic transitions in early- tomid-20th-centuryEurope, LatinAmerica and theCa- ribbean.While agreeingwithMoore (1966) that landlordswere democracy’s keyopponents, theydisputedMoore’s corollaryclaimthat the taskofadvanc- ing democracy had thus fallen to nonlandlord elites. In their view, the prin- cipal agents of democratization were nonelites, and industrial elites were more frequently their enemies than their allies. Although Rueschemeyer et al. (1992) find that this pattern was muted in Latin America and the Caribbean, their paradigmatic cases fit this pattern, and many other scholars have ap- plied variants of this argument to other cases and other time periods (Ther- born 1977; Paige 1990; Keck 1995; Bermeo 1997; Wood 2001; Eley 2002; Yang 2007; Kraus 2007).7 This work exhibits all the strengths of the comparative historical ap- proach. Its partisans present fine-grained evidence of the role of different class actors in advancing or stymieing democratization.However, it also suf- fers the weaknesses that accompany it. While the hypotheses are general ones, the evidence is not. Recent quantitative work has furnished general evidence for the first hy- pothesis (Boix 2003; Ansell and Samuels 2014; Albertus 2017). I reproduce this finding in what follows. But quantitative evidence for the second hy- pothesis that nonelites forged democracy is less impressive. The work that exists relies on measures that are limited in availability and also likely to be endogenous to democracy (Przeworski 2009; Teorell 2010; Aidt and Jensen 2014; Haggard and Kaufman 2016; Kadivar and Caren 2016). The princi- pal contribution of this article is to propose a cross-national, long-run mea- sure of nonelite capacity. Exogenous Democratization Themodernization, inequality-centered, and social forces accounts all share the view that democracy is endogenous to development. But several authors have argued that much of the variation in levels of democracy cannot be ex- plained by reference to patterns in development or to the resulting contours of the class struggle. What elsematters? Some dispute the obsessionwith specifically economic cleavages. Somers (1993), for instance, argues that democracy emerges in only a subset of institutional settings. Similarly, in their criticism of themod- 7 As one reviewer noted, these arguments have a long lineage in the world outside acade- mia, as well (Marx 1852; Rosenberg 1939; Kautsky 1996). American Journal of Sociology 670 ernization view, Acemoglu et al. (2008) attribute long-run trajectories of de- mocratization to divergent institutional environments (which were the ac- tual cause of divergent development paths). For their part, Higley and Bur- ton (1989) argue that successful democratization requires elite unity, which is itself the result of elite settlements or transformations that have little to do with patterns of socioeconomic development. Summarizing, Haggard and Kaufman (2016, p. xviii) complain that the “structural proclivities” of traditional approaches have crowded out institutional and political expla- nations. Other authors emphasize the agency of political actors and parties. A rich literature attributes democratic consolidation to good choices made by key political actors at key times (Linz and Stepan 1978; O’Donnell, Schmitter, and Whitehead 1986; Diamond and Linz 1995). As Karl (1990) argues, this tradition of “transitology”was led to its focus on agency by the concern that key cases (especially LatinAmerica in the 1980s) defied staple theories. Some recent work has resurrected this view that the fate of democracy is governed by the choices of parties and politicians (Bermeo 2010; Ziblatt 2017). Can these accounts of democratization be reconciled with themoderniza- tion, inequality-centered, and social forces schools? And if so, how? Endog- enous theories seek to explainwhy economic development is associated with democracy, while other accounts identify variation that this generalization ignores (Wejnert 2005). Indeed, partisans of these theories often motivate their work by emphasizing variation that the endogenous tradition leaves unexplained (e.g., Bermeo 2010, pp. 1120–21). This article is motivated by the same observation, but in reverse. Certainly, there are factors unrelated to capitalist development that ex- plainmuch that is interesting about democracy’s origins. But this fact should not blind us to the impact of capitalism on democracy. In short, my argu- ment is not at all that the endogenous view should supplant the exogenous one, but that, with some clarity about the questions each one answers, they can profitably coexist. The Democracy Gap Of course, sometimes these accounts address the same question. Consider, for instance, one of the obvious puzzles onwhich this scholarshipmight shed some light:Why have developing countries been persistently less democratic than countries in the developed world? By the modernization account, the developingworld is less democratic simply because it is less developed. Both of the other endogenous accounts maintain that the issue is not the underde- velopment of these countries, but either concomitant patterns of inequality (see Ansell and Samuels 2014, pp. 17–35) or an unpropitious distribution of class capacities (weaker nonelites, stronger landlords). Exogenous explana- Democracy and the Class Struggle 671 tions of this gap are various: whether institutional (Acemoglu et al. 2008), cultural (Woodberry 2012), or world systemic (Alavi 1972; Bollen 1983). In counterfactuals presented at the end of this article, I illustrate the explana- tory power of the social forces account specifically. A little more than half of the democracy gap between the developing and advanced worlds is ex- plained by the muted capacity of nonelites and the elevated power of land- lords. This illustrates the utility of some generalizations, even as the remain- der invites other explanations. THE TRANSITION GAME Those who against the public weal have power cannot be expected to yield save to superior power. —W. E. B. Du Bois ([1935] 1998) In my view, the existing game-theoretic tradition has lost sight of impor- tant insights from comparative and historical work on democratization. As a consequence, the dominantmodelsmistheorize the conditions underwhich nonelites are best positioned to demand democracy from recalcitrant elites. In this section, I propose to remedy this error by outliningwhat I will call the social forces model. I am not the first to highlight these failings. Slater (2009, pp. 214–17) and Haggard and Kaufman (2012, 2016) both criticize Boix and Acemoglu and Robinson for failing to model the conditions under which nonelites over- come collective action problems. Slater, specifically, argues that capacities arise from “emotive collective identifications” (Slater 2009, p. 220), the force ofwhich depends on a prior, path-dependent political history and not on any broad correlates of economic life. His criticism thus deliberately abandons what he calls “rationalist” models of collective action (Slater 2009, p. 221). I propose an alternative, “rationalist” remedy to the same problem. I draw on a different literature to identify the economic conditions that incubate nonelite capacities over the long run. My argument is not novel, but recent work on democratization seems to have forgotten it. In the early 1970s, both Charles Tilly (with collaborators) andWalter Korpi lambasted reigning the- ories of revolution for concluding that revolutions happen when people be- come discontented (Snyder andTilly 1972; Lodhi andTilly 1973; Tilly 1973; Korpi 1974). Tilly contrasted this approach to theories that study the capac- ities of ordinary individuals to exercise leverage over the powerful, rather than merely their incentives to do. In his words, the “effects of large-scale change on conflict run through the structure of power, especially by shaping the organizationalmeans and resources available to different . . . contenders” (Tilly 1973, p. 429). Below, I build on Tilly’s observation and other work to establish three propositions. American Journal of Sociology 672 1. Elites have more power than nonelites because they have greater ca- pacities to disrupt economic life. 2. This gap in disruptive capacities narrows or widens depending on the character of the economic roles filled by nonelites. 3. Where this gap narrows, democracy is more likely. The Capacity Gap Under what circumstances are dictatorships likely to become more demo- cratic, or democracies likely to backslide toward authoritarianism? To an- swer this, we require an account of who is likely to demand democracy and who is not. The game-theoretic tradition has adopted several simplifying judgments about the factors that bear on democratic outcomes. It has fo- cused on agents as defined by the economic assets they own. This has an a priori motivation, since the significance of democracy lies in the fact that it distributes political power equally in societies inwhich economic resources are unequal (Rueschemeyer et al. 1992, p. 44). I follow their lead here. To be clear, the justification of these simplifications is empirical. They help derive testable hypotheses about the conditions under which we should see democ- ratization or its reverse. Consider a society of two types of actors: a tiny minority of elites, who command assets that they rely on to generate an outsized share of total in- come, and a largemajority of nonelites, who are propertyless.8 Nonelites rely on their capacity to work for a source of income. Because assets are scarce but the capacity to labor is plentiful, this income is inferior to that earned by elites. Last, assume a government that presides over this society, aboutwhich three facts are most important. First, this state is formally autonomous. The actors who administer the state have no a priori ties or allegiances.9 Second, this state has no independent resource base. To pursue its own agenda, the 8 In this article I will refer to these groups as elites (below, industrial elites or landlords) and nonelites, rather than “the bourgeoisie” or “the working class.” These latter terms are encumbered by the fact that they have been used differently by different authors. I will sometimes refer to the conflict between elites and nonelites as a class struggle, which implies nomore than the fact that I have defined these groups by their relationship to eco- nomic assets. 9 While history suggests that elites often staff the offices of the state, there are two good reasons to assume that the state is staffed by extraeconomic actors. First, while state ac- tors are drawn from the elite, most of the elite are not state actors. To understand why elites defend dictatorship, as I argue here, we must appreciate (1) the leverage that all elites have over the state and (2) the interests that all elites have in restricting nonelite ac- cess to the state, even if they are not state actors themselves. Second, as Slater et al. (2014) argue in a criticism of redistributivist models of the transition game, many 20th-century dictatorships were led by obviously autonomous actors (e.g., the military). I thank a re- viewer for pushing me to clarify this point. Democracy and the Class Struggle 673 state depends on revenue drawn from taxing economic activity. Third, this state has the authority to affect the distribution of wealth, whether through tax-and-transfer policies or through regulating exchange between elites and nonelites. Naturally, elites and nonelites will clash over the direction of gov- ernment policy. Crucially, their incentives to do so are indistinguishable. Nonelites want redistribution, but no more than elites hope to prevent it. However, while both sides have equal incentives, they do not have equiv- alent capacities. Why? Elite capacity is a feature of the property structure. This follows from the assumptions above. The state depends on a healthy economy to yield the revenues it requires. Thehealth of the economy is a func- tion of the health of investment, which means that it is determined first and foremost by the decisions of those who own the economy’s commanding heights. If elites refuse to put their scarce assets to work, state revenues suf- fer greatly. Critically, the significance of this impact is a function of the scar- cityof these assets. Substitutes for their assets arenot readilyavailable,which gives elites leverage over the state. As a consequence, when considering dif- ferent policy options, the state will show deference to elites (Lindblom 1977, 1982;Offe1984;Przeworski1986;BowlesandGintis1987;Swank1992;Win- ters 1996). Nonelites, on the other hand, rely on an asset that is effectively universal, and for which substitutes are typically available. Withdrawing participa- tion as an individual or as a small group is thus ineffective. Instead, non- elites exercise capacity in numbers. They seek to sway the state by means of collective action—by calling protests, organizing unions, forming parties, and more. They have to coordinate withdrawal from the everyday routines to which they are collectively indispensable and on which a healthy econ- omy depends (Piven and Cloward 1978; Schwartz 1988). As with elites, the effectiveness of this action depends on the extent to which it threatens the resource base of the state. Both elites and nonelites thus wield capacity in proportion to the amount of disruption they threaten, but the reasoning above has only established that elites and nonelites do this differently. Why might one side have an ad- vantage? Capacities are uneven because achieving a fixed level of disruption is far easier for elites than for nonelites. Nonelite exit depends on the coordi- nation of massive collective action, but elites can achieve the same level of disruption with far fewer participants. Narrowing the Gap This said, history furnishes innumerable examples of nonelites winning concessions from economic elites and the state.Whymight the balance of ca- pacities between elites andnonelites tilt in their favor? It is here that the dom- inant formalizations prove unhelpful. For Boix and Acemoglu and Robin- American Journal of Sociology 674 son, nonelites acquire capacities for unpredictable reasons. For Ansell and Samuels, groups wield capacity in proportion to their resources, convention- ally understood. Here I present my reasons for preferring an alternative. In the next section, I present evidence that this alternative explains patterns of nonelite organization and mobilization over the sweep of modern history. I assume that the capacity of elites is stable. Where relative capacity var- ies, it does so because of shifts in the ability of nonelites to act collectively in disruptive ways. So, why might nonelite capacity vary? Nonelite capacity varies because not every nonelite role has equivalent disruptive capacities. Consider at least two reasons that this might be the case. First, some nonelites have greater leverage over economic life. Some work in industries that produce more of other industries’ inputs or consume more of other industries’ outputs (Perrone, Wright, and Griffin 1984; Wal- lace, Griffin, and Rubin 1989). Others have scarce skills or are located far afield frompopulation centers, whichmeans that elites will have trouble ob- taining replacements (Kimeldorf 2013). The refusal of nonelites to fill these roles inflicts greater costs than the refusal of other nonelites to fill theirs. Sec- ond, in some roles, nonelites find it easier to coordinate collective action. Some work in densely clustered workplaces, while others work alone or in small groups. Constant contact facilitates collective action. For these rea- sons, nonelite capacity (and bymy earlier assumption, relative capacity) will vary with the distribution of nonelites into these differentially empowering roles. When the discrepancy in the disruptive capacities of elites and nonelites is large, the state will be solicitous toward elites. However, as this gap nar- rows, the state’s attentions will shift. The specifics are arbitrary: what is im- portant is that the state’s optimal strategy is less elite friendly than the max- imally friendly one. And thus, as the gap narrows, so grows the influence of nonelites on the state.10 This line of reasoning thus concludes in a familiar proposition: the balance of power shapes the balance of policy (Stephens 1979; Korpi 1983; Esping-Andersen 1990; Hicks 1999; Kristal 2010; Volscho and Kelly 2012; Hung and Thompson 2016).11 10 Why, if elites are always more capable of disruption than nonelites, should the state ever listen to nonelites? If the state is committed tominimizing disruption, why not attend only to the interests of elites? To establish that it must, I assume that the intensity of col- lective action is a function not just of existing capacities, but also of time spent acting col- lectively. The longer nonelites spend organizing against grievances that go unfulfilled, the more threatening their collective action is likely to be. Thus, for the state, ignoring the interests of nonelites risks greater disruption and perhaps calamity in the future.Min- imizing disruption thus requires a middle-of-the-road strategy aimed at placating both elites and nonelites. 11 Power-resources theory is primarily concerned with explaining policy outcomes in ad- vanced capitalist democracies, and its focus is on organizational and political rather than structural sources of actors’ powerKorpi (2006, p. 187). This being said, to the extent that Democracy and the Class Struggle 675 Democracy or Dictatorship? Suppose that political authority can be organized democratically, where by democracywemean that the state is subject to regular, competitive elections involving elites and nonelites alike. Elites will have incentives to oppose or obstruct democratization, and nonelites will have incentives to demand or safeguard it. This is because nonelites are numerous and elites a minority. All else equal, the extension of suffrage to propertyless nonelites should lead to less elite-friendly policy, since state actors interested in retaining their po- sition now have to accommodate the preferences of nonelites. This does not mean that they are free to ignore elites, who still have control of scarce assets, and thus investment. It means only that democracy introduces important, countervailing pressures. Thus, we can now ask,When are we likely to observe democratization or its reverse? Between equal incentives, capacity decides. I expect democra- tization to be associated with a narrowing of the capacity gap between elites and nonelites.Where nonelites accumulate capacity, we should see progress toward democracy. This insight—foundational to the social forces tradition, and based on priors that should be familiar to scholars of social movements and the welfare state—has been absent from the resurgent literature on de- mocracy’s origins. This article proposes to reintroduce it. Landed Elites Asmentioned earlier, the social forces traditionmakes two predictions about democracy: first, that nonelites are the protagonists of the democratic tran- sition, and second, that landlords are the antagonists. I have explained the hypothesis that stronger nonelites make democracy more likely, but what about landlords? Why should we expect them to be particularly keen de- fenders of dictatorship? Until now I have assumed that elites are undifferentiated. Suppose, how- ever, that some elites rely on land to generate their income and others rely on industrial and commercial property. By the reasoning above, democracy re- duces the returns to all assets because it enhances the capacity of nonelites to sway the state (which regulates their use) and to bargain privately with elites. However, not all assets will be affected in the same way. First, returns to land are particularly dependent on the willingness of the state to guarantee the structural facts are broadly correlated with organizational outcomes (see below), the foregoing can be considered a more abstract view of what those power resources actu- ally entail. In this sense, the social forces account of democratization is a close cousin of power-resources theory. American Journal of Sociology 676 a docile and immobile workforce. Juridical controls associated with labor immobility and repression are more difficult to maintain under democracy (Gerschenkron 1966;Moore 1966; Zeitlin 1984; Stephens 1989; Ruescheme- yer et al. 1992). Second, asBoix (2003) argues, because landedassets arefixed in place, landlords will be less able than other elites to flee the prying hands of the newly democratic state. For both of these reasons, landed elites are es- pecially vulnerable to democratization, and they will therefore have strong incentives to oppose it. Note that nothing in this model predicts that elites not based in land will promote democracy. But countries in which power has shifted from the landed to the industrial elite should provemore amena- ble to democratization. DISRUPTIVE CAPACITY To assess the social forces account, we require a measure of the capacity of nonelites to engage in disruptive action. Where this capacity increases, the balance of power shifts in favor of nonelites, and democracy should bemore likely. An ideal measure would marshal information about the different proper- ties of nonelite positions in the economy (e.g., the economic importance of the various kinds of work, the difficulties of replacing any given worker, and the density of worksites). It may be possible to construct something like this in the most data-rich countries in the most data-rich years, but for inferen- tial reasons, this approach is not of much use. Restricting the sample to these countries would limit us to units and time in which there is no substantial variation in the level of formal democracy. Thus, we need an alternative. I propose to use long-runmeasures of industry-level employment to construct a substitute index. I measure nonelite disruptive capacity as the proportion of theworking-age populationwho are employed inmanufacturing, mining, construction, or transport, as against those in agriculture, services, commerce, other occupations or those who are otherwise outside of the labor force or un- recorded in surveys. disruptive capacity 5 high-capacityworkers=working-age population: The reasoning behind this index is straightforward. I consider manufac- turing, mining, construction, and transport to be high-capacity industries. It is a well-known fact that workers employed in these industries have consis- tently exhibited higher levels of organization and mobilization than work- ers employed elsewhere (Rubin 1986; Wallace et al. 1989; Southworth and Stepan-Norris 2009; Stepan-Norris and Southworth 2010; Kimeldorf 2013; Kristal 2013). To the extent that a greater share of all nonelites are employed in these industries, it should raise overall disruptive capacity. Democracy and the Class Struggle 677 I justify my measure on empirical grounds. Figure 1 presents evidence that the measure is associated with three leading indicators of nonelite ca- pacity and mobilization: the proportion of the working-age population in unions (union membership), the number of strikes per 100,000 working- age people (strike frequency), and the number of days lost to strikes for every 1,000 working-age people (strike volume).12 Across specifications, my mea- sure of disruptive capacity is a statistically significant predictor of trends in union membership (at a 5 0.10), as well as the frequency and volume of strike activity at (at a5 0.01 and a5 0.05, respectively).13 I have standard- ized the estimates by the averagewithin-country standard deviations to ease interpretation. As figure 1 shows, in each case the estimated impact of dis- ruptive capacity is sizable. A standard deviation increase in disruptive ca- pacity implies almost as large a change in union membership (0.91 SDs), a change of about 0.24 standard deviations in strike frequency, and a change of 0.08 standard deviations in strike volume.14 Would it be better to measure disruptive capacity by using these indices, or othermeasures of organization ormobilization?Many scholars have used directmeasures ofworkers’ associational power,whether theybe actualmea- sures of the state ofworker organization (Garrett 1998;Kristal 2010;Haggard and Kaufman 2016) or, more recently, an index that captures the degree to whichworkers’ rights are protected (Mosley andUno 2007; Dean 2015; Ker- rissey 2015). Some researchers of democratization have employed measures of nonelitemobilization or organization (Przeworski 2009; Teorell 2010;Aidt and Jensen 2014; Kadivar and Caren 2016; Haggard and Kaufman 2016). Separately,Rudra(2002)hasproposedameasureof laborcapacity that,much like my own, is an attempt to capture the underlying capacity of nonelites to organize (see also Caraway, Rickard, and Anner 2012). In this vein, as an al- ternativemeasure of nonelite capacity,Haggard andKaufman (2016) use the 12 For a discussion of the concepts of “strike frequency” and “strike volume,” see Hibbs (1978). In the supplementary online appendix to this paper, I give additional information about data sources. I also discuss the estimation method, the counterfactuals, model fit, and the robustness tests in greater detail than I do in this article. 13 To model these three variables, I adopt the strategies that I discuss in more detail be- low. That is to say, all models include country fixed effects to account for unobserved country-level heterogeneity, year dummies to capture common time trends, and one or more lags of the dependent variable in order to capture dynamics. All samples are re- stricted to countries with 20 or more observations to mitigate Nickell’s bias. 14 Strike frequency and volume are typically low, but some countries record some years in which strikes are frequent and/or very large. Disruptive capacity explains why the ex- pected level of strike activity is higher in some years than in others, but it cannot, as a slow-moving series, explain these outlying years. This is reflected in the fact that these models generally fit the data less well than the models of union membership. It also helps explain why the implied change in strike frequency or volume is small, as a share of ob- served movements (i.e., the average within-country standard deviation is large, due to these outlying years). American Journal of Sociology 678 manufacturing share of GDP. Yet for at least three reasons, my approach is preferable. First, country-year coverage for all other measures is vastly inferior. As table 1 shows, thenextmost comprehensive indicator is thenumberof strikes per capita, but this is only available in 4,378 country-years forwhich democ- FIG. 1.—This graph plots the estimated long-run impact of disruptive capacity on each of three standardmeasures of nonelite capacity ormobilization. These estimates are stan- dardized (i.e., divided by the averagewithin-country standard deviation of the dependent variable and multiplied by the average within-country standard deviation of disruptive capacity). As expected, each of the three estimates is positive and statistically noteworthy at conventional levels (in the case of the union membership ratio, at a 5 0.10 in a two- sided test). TABLE 1 Indicators of Nonelite Capacity N N (Polity2) D Average Polity2 Countries Date Range Disruptive capacity. . . . . . . . . . . . 8,668 7,610 115 179 1754–2012 Manufacturing share . . . . . . . . . . 6,203 4,947 114 191 1960–2016 Strikes per capita . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5,282 4,378 127 152 1881–2008 Strike frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5,030 4,343 127 138 1881–2008 Strike frequency per worker. . . . . 4,486 4,012 130 123 1881–2008 Strike volume per capita . . . . . . . 4,444 3,709 129 139 1890–2008 Strike volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4,283 3,684 129 129 1890–2008 Strike volume per worker. . . . . . . 3,833 3,450 132 113 1890–2008 Labor rights index . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,425 2,848 111 201 1985–2002 Potential labor power . . . . . . . . . . 2,874 2,746 114 145 1970–2003 Union members per capita . . . . . . 2,629 2,448 142 63 1885–2012 Union membership . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,581 2,426 142 59 1885–2012 Union density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,506 2,387 142 59 1890–2012 NOTE.—This table shows that mymeasure of nonelite capacity has two advantages. First, it is available in a far larger sample of countries and over a far longer period. Second, it is avail- able in a substantially less biased sample (ΔAverage Polity2 denotes the difference between the sample Polity2 average and the Polity2 average for all sovereign countries in the modern period) than are all other measures except for Potential Labor Power (Rudra 2002), the Labor Rights Index (Mosley and Uno 2007), and the manufacturing share of GDP (Haggard and Kaufman 2016), all of which have inferior coverage. Democracy and the Class Struggle 679 racy data are also present (i.e., only 60%of the coverage of disruptive capac- ity). More importantly, table 1 shows that measures of mobilization and es- pecially organization bias the sample, since they are much more likely to be available indemocratic thanauthoritariancountries.Wheredataonthenum- ber of unionmembers are available, the averagedemocracy score is 42 points higher (on a 0–100 scale) than the average score in all countries and years for which data exist. Some bias is unavoidable, but table 1 shows that disruptive capacity minimizes this problem while maximizing coverage.15 Second, more explicit measures of organization or mobilization raise the likelihood that the chosen measure is endogenous to the dependent variable or something closely associatedwith it.More democratic countries are likely tomake it easier forworkers to join unions or organize protests.Mymeasure is not obviously exogenous, but the extent of any endogeneity bias is likely to be less severe. Third, my measure has important theoretical advantages. As outlined earlier, where nonelites win democracy, this is because state administrators concede it when they realize that nonelites are capable of significant disrup- tion. All else equal, this capacity should coincide with strikes and protests of which we have a record. But, sometimes, we might expect that concessions will be offered in anticipation of nonelite unrest, which will thus never tran- spire.Mobilization is thus only ever likely to be imperfectly related to capac- ity: strong nonelites might not need to mobilize, and weak nonelites may mobilize out of desperation. Thus, it makes sense tomeasure capacity rather thanmobilization. And none of the other capacitymeasures identify the cor- rect protagonists. Rudra (2002) proposes ameasure rooted in the advantages ofhigh-skillworkers insidemanufacturing,butthis ignores therelativelyhigh disruptive capacities of allmanufacturingworkers andworkers in other sec- tors (mining, construction, and transport).Haggard andKaufman (2016) use the share of manufacturing in GDP, but this has two problems: for gauging capacity, it is thewrongmeasure of significance (i.e., value-added rather than employment), and it again ignores the relative capacities of workers in other industries. Finally, even if existing alternatives are unfeasible, my decision to ap- proximate disruptive capacity by the share of the working-age population employed in traditionally disruptive industries raises a conceptual concern. Does variation in this index simply register economic development? As dis- cussed already, modernization theorists argue that development incubates democracy by raising standards of living and incubating amiddle class. This is notmyhypothesis, but onemightworry thatmy index is testing theirmech- 15 Both Rudra’s PLP and Mosley’s Labor Rights Index are available in less biased sam- ples than disruptive capacity but over a time period that is far too truncated to include in models of long-run democratization. American Journal of Sociology 680 anism rather than my own. However, note that the share of the working- age population employed in high-capacity industries is not a straightforward correlate of economic development. Over time in a single country, as is well- known, the relationship is variable: positive at earlier levels of development and thennegative at higher levels.There is also important cross-country var- iation. Recent work has shown that, in later developing countries, peak in- dustrial employmentoccurs earlieron thedevelopmentpathandat lower lev- els of industrial employment than in earlier developers (what Rodrik [2016b] calls “premature deindustrialization”). In short, economic development does not yield equivalent disruptive capacities at all times or in all places. Of course, as with other variables that this literature has previously employed, disruptive capacity is imperfectly correlated with economic development (r 5 0.62). I approach this difficulty conventionally, which is to say that I control for levels of development in the regressions I introduce later. My preferred models estimate the impact of disruptive capacity on democracy, conditional on the confounding consequences of GDP per capita. ESTIMATION Variables As described, the principal contribution of this article is to propose a quan- titative test of the social forces account—and, specifically, of the hypothesis that nonelite capacity drives democratic gains. To do so, I run panel regres- sions over the span of the modern history of democracy. As dependent var- iables, I use two continuous measures of the quality of a country’s democ- racy. First, I use the 21-point Polity2 score, rescaled to lie between 0 and 100 in order to ease interpretation. It is derived frommeasures of six dimensions of a country’s political state, which together evaluate executive recruitment, political participation, and checks on executive authority (Marshall, Gurr, and Jaggers 2014). A score of 0 on my rescaled index (–10 on the original in- dex) denotes a hereditary monarchy or its equivalent, and a score of 100 (110 on the original index) denotes full democracy. In 2014, only Saudi Ara- bia, Bahrain, North Korea, and Bhutan received the lowest score on this in- dex, and there were 35 countries that received the highest. In all, data are available for 201 sovereign states, some as early as 1800. Table 2 shows in- sample descriptive statistics for this and all other variables. Reliable measurement of the level of democracy is no easy task. Some of the relevant properties are very difficult to quantify, especially sincewe seek consistency across long spansof timeandanarrayof countries.ThePolity IV project is a credible attempt to this end, but it has its critics (Cheibub, Gandhi, and Vreeland 2010). To ensure that my results are not sensitive to its mea- surement decisions, I also make use of an alternative measure from the Va- Democracy and the Class Struggle 681 rieties of Democracy data set (hereafter V-Dem). V-Dem solicits answers to a wide range of evaluative questions from several thousand country experts and pools these responses via a model that accounts for differences in inter- pretation and reliability across coders (Coppedge et al. 2016; Pemstein et al. 2015). This procedure yields estimates of the level of democracy in five dif- ferent dimensions (as well as several subdimensional measures). In this anal- ysis, I use the singlemeasure in V-Dem that best captures overall progress in the prevalence of electoral democracy (v2x_polyarchy, hereafter Electoral Democracy). As discussed already, my measure of nonelite capacity is a count of the total number of workers inmanufacturing, mining, construction, and trans- port divided by the size of the working-age population. Data on the sectoral breakdown of the labor force comes from three sources. For the early period, I used the various volumes of Mitchell’s International Historical Statistics (Mitchell 2013).16 For the post–WorldWar II period, I updated and expanded coverage using two other data sets, one available via the International Labour Organization and the other curated by the Groningen Growth and Develop- ment Center (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2014). Both theMitchell and In- ternational Labour Organization data sets sometimes report categories that straddle the high-capacity and low-capacity classifications (e.g., transport and commerce together). In these cases, I estimate the proportion of these TABLE 2 Descriptive Statistics Variable Average SD Within-Country SD Dependent: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Polity2 score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67.32 34.66 19.71 Electoral democracy . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.35 29.17 15.85 Independent: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . GDP per capita (log) . . . . . . . . . . . . 8.13 .93 .44 Growth rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.96 5.17 4.69 Disruptive capacity. . . . . . . . . . . . . 19.90 8.37 3.35 Educational attainment . . . . . . . . . 6.13 2.97 1.63 Urbanity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 229.47 142.19 69.26 Landlord power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27.37 19.72 10.20 Income inequality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36.71 9.95 3.00 NOTE.—Descriptive statistics from my preferred sample, where Polity2 is the dependent variable (except for the electoral democracy variable, which is from its own preferred sample). SD refers to the overall standard deviation, while within-country SD refers to the average of all the within-country standard deviations. 16 The data originate in national censuses that are available at irregular intervals, so I linearly interpolated the missing values. American Journal of Sociology 682 composite categories that are high-capacity from the nearest observation for that country in which the relevant categories are reported separately. Other- wise, I considered the Groningen data set the most reliable and Mitchell’s the least. Accordingly, if two or more data sets covered the same country- year, I relied on them in this order. The working-age population is defined as those between the ages of 15 and 65. These data come from two sources. For the early period, Mitchell’s International Historical Statistics collates population censuses and reports totals by age and gender.Occasionally, they report categories that straddle the working-age classification, in which case I proceed as above and estimate the proportion of these categories that are working-age by drawing information from the nearest observation in which no straddle categories are present. For the post-1960 period, annual and complete estimates are available through the United Nations. The unconditional effect of disruptive capacity may partly capture the negative impact of the other half of the social forces account. I emulate An- sell and Samuels (2014) and estimate landlord capacity by the interaction of the percentage of farmland cultivated by family farms and the percentage of the population that lives on the land. Landlords should be most powerful where their chief asset is highly concentrated in their hands andwhere large numbersofpeople still dependon landfor their livelihood.Bothof thesemea- sures come fromVanhanen (2003). To ease interpretation, I invert eachmea- sure (i.e., subtract the original by 100) and rescale their product to lie be- tween 0 and 100. Low values of this index thus denote country-years in which few people live on the land and most land is in the hand of family farmers. High values of this index denote country-years in whichmost people live on the land and the distribution of land is skewed. Mymain concern in this article is to demonstrate that these two variables help explain democratization, net of likely confounders, so in my preferred specification I include measures of the two other theories of endogenous de- mocratization. I measure the modernization account in three ways. Most importantly, I control for a country’s level of development. I measure this by the log of GDP per capita, which requires combining data from the Penn World Tables and Angus Maddison’s long-run data set. From the same data, I calculated the logarithmicgrowth rate ofGDPper capita,which I also include. This variable controls for the impact of antecedent growth rates on subsequent democratization—whether the rate of economic growth be- tween time t 2 2 and t 2 1 affects a country’s democracy score at time t. Separately, I include ameasure of educational attainment.Whether because it incubates tolerance, or because it is a proxy for the growth of a middle class, higher levels of educational attainment should be associated with sub- sequent democratization (Murtin and Wacziarg 2014). These estimates are taken directly from a recent long-run data set published by Morrisson and Murtin (2009). Otherwise, modernization might matter because it clusters Democracy and the Class Struggle 683 people into large cities. The growth of cities is an index of functional com- plexity, which some link to democratic government (Cutright 1963). I thus include a measure of the proportion of a country’s population that lives in cities with more than 100,000 residents (Banks andWilson 2015). Measure- ment of the inequality-centric account ismore straightforward. As discussed already, the relationship between antecedent levels of inequality and subse- quent democratization outcomes has been the subject of much recent re- search. Income inequality is the key variable in all leading models of the transition game. I followed Ansell and Samuels (2014), and for the early pe- riod used Bourguignon and Morrisson’s historical estimates of the income distribution (BourguignonandMorrisson2002). I combined thesewithmore recent, country-specific inequality estimates from Babones and Alvarez- Rivadulla (2007) and Solt (2014). Finally, to ensure that my results are not simplyanartefactof ignoringthediffusionofdemocracyacrossborders (Wej- nert 2005), I measure the average level of democracy in all of a given coun- try’s regional neighbors in the previous year. Model I assess the hypothesis that nonelite capacity drives democratization on sam- ples containing as many as 104 sovereign countries and in the date range from 1821 and 2013 and the hypothesis that landlord power obstructs it on a sample of as many as 145 countries in the date range between 1859 and 2008. When drawing inferences from within-country, over-time variation, as I do here, the advantages of long-run coverage are considerable (Scheve andStasavage2009,pp.216–17).Theadditionof several controlsmeans that the samples for my preferred models contain fewer countries and span less time (see tables 3 and 4 for specifics). The specification I employ is very sim- ilar to themodels estimated in Acemoglu et al. (2008, 2009), Boix (2011), and Treisman (2015), where dit 5 adit21 1 gDCAPit21 1 zLANDit21 1 x lit 2 1b 1 mt 1 di 1 Eit, (1) inwhichdit represents either thePolity2orelectoraldemocracy scoreof coun- try i at time t, and dit21 is thus a single lag of the dependent variable, which is included to account for the fact that the democracy score is correlated with itself over time (Keele and Kelly 2006; De Boef and Keele 2008; Beck and Katz 2011). The raw coefficients from this specification yield the immediate impact of the independent variables on the outcome. These understate the consequences of a change in the independent variables. Due to the inclusion of a lagged term among the estimators, any given change in an independent variable alsohas knock-on effects on the outcome in future timeperiods.The American Journal of Sociology 684 T A B L E 3 L o n g -R u n E st im at es ,P o li ty 2 (1 ) (2 ) (3 ) (4 ) (5 ) (6 ) L on g- ru n m u lt ip lie r: D is ru p ti v e ca p ac it y .. .. .. .. .. . 2. 97 8* * 2. 62 4* * 4. 16 8* * [1 .0 1, 5. 08 ] [.6 8, 4. 68 ] [1 .3 5, 6. 94 ] L an d lo rd p ow er .. .. .. .. .. .. . 2 4. 90 4* * 2 5. 50 5* * 2 5. 77 4* * [2 7. 55 ,2 2. 4] [2 9. 04 ,2 2. 46 ] [2 10 .0 7, 2 2. 44 ] G D P p er ca p it a (lo g) .. .. .. .. .. 2. 44 9 2 1. 21 9 [2 2. 9, 8. 48 ] [2 8. 77 ,6 .7 6] G ro w th ra te .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 2 .0 03 .0 94 [2 2. 71 ,2 .5 3] [2 4. 02 ,3 .7 2] E d u ca ti on al at ta in m en t .. .. .. . 2 3. 27 3 8. 68 1 [2 10 .6 7, 4. 64 ] [2 2. 16 ,1 9. 67 ] U rb an it y .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 3. 15 6* 2 2. 28 7 [.2 6, 6. 04 ] [2 5. 23 ,. 81 ] In co m e in eq u al it y .. .. .. .. .. .. .5 16 2. 06 1 [2 2. 07 ,2 .8 9] [2 .9 9, 5. 16 ] P ol it y2 sc or e (r eg io n al av er ag e) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5. 47 1* * [1 .1 8, 9. 69 ] M od el in fo rm at io n : O b se rv at io n s. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 7, 12 7 10 ,6 56 6, 42 7 6, 99 5 9, 50 1 4, 43 7 C ou n tr ie s. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 4 14 5 96 90 12 1 64 D at e ra n ge .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18 21 – 20 13 18 59 – 20 08 18 59 – 20 08 18 71 – 20 03 18 21 – 20 14 18 71 – 20 03 A v er ag e N i .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 68 .5 73 .5 66 .9 77 .7 78 .5 69 .3 A d ju st ed R 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .8 80 .8 85 .8 81 .8 78 .9 14 .8 69 N O T E .— T h is ta b le re p or ts th e es ti m at ed lo n g- ru n ef fe ct s ac ro ss th e si x sp ec ifi ca ti on s I es ti m at e: b iv ar ia te m od el s w it h m y tw o k ey v ar ia b le s (c ol s. 1 an d 2) ,a so ci al fo rc es m od el (c ol .3 ), a m od er n iz at io n m od el (c ol .4 ), an in eq u al it y- ce n tr ic m od el (c ol .5 ), an d m y p re fe rr ed m od el (c ol .6 ), w h ic h in cl u d es al lv ar ia b le s. T h e d ep en d en t v ar ia b le h er e is th e P ol it y2 sc or e. A ll m od el s in cl u d e on e la g of th e P ol it y2 sc or e an d co u n tr y- an d ye ar -l ev el fi xe d ef fe ct s. A s h yp ot h es iz ed ,t h e lo n g- ru n im p ac t of d is ru p ti v e ca p ac it y is p os it iv e an d st at is ti ca lly si gn ifi ca n t, w h ile th e lo n g- ru n im p ac t of la n d lo rd p ow er is n eg at iv e an d st at is ti ca lly si gn ifi ca n t. T A B L E 4 L o n g -R u n E st im at es ,E le ct o ra l D em o cr ac y (1 ) (2 ) (3 ) (4 ) (5 ) (6 ) L on g- ru n m u lt ip lie r: D is ru p ti v e ca p ac it y .. .. .. .. .. . 1. 40 61 1. 48 91 2. 81 2* * [2 .1 3, 3. 15 ] [0 ,3 .2 7] [.6 9, 5. 08 ] L an d lo rd p ow er .. .. .. .. .. .. . 2 3. 01 4* * 2 3. 35 1* * 2 6. 02 2* * [2 5. 08 ,2 1. 11 ] [2 6. 07 ,2 .7 9] [2 8. 82 ,2 3. 31 ] G D P p er ca p it a (lo g) .. .. .. .. .. 3. 33 6 2 .6 75 [2 1. 62 ,8 .6 9] [2 7. 52 ,5 .7 ] G ro w th ra te .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 1. 92 4 2. 36 1 [2 1. 12 ,5 .2 3] [2 2. 52 ,7 .2 4] E d u ca ti on al at ta in m en t .. .. .. . 2. 53 2 11 .9 38 * [2 4. 98 ,1 0. 56 ] [.6 7, 25 .1 3] U rb an it y .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 1. 37 7 2 2. 80 91 [2 1, 3. 69 ] [2 5. 72 ,0 ] In co m e in eq u al it y .. .. .. .. .. .. 1. 49 31 2. 16 0 [2 .1 6, 3. 34 ] [2 .4 9, 5. 11 ] E le ct or al d em oc ra cy (r eg io n al av er ag e) .. .. .. .. .. 7. 27 4* * [1 .6 5, 12 .4 6] M od el in fo rm at io n : O b se rv at io n s. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 6, 69 1 8, 83 7 5, 85 5 6, 09 3 7, 24 6 4, 01 3 C ou n tr ie s. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 2 13 8 93 89 11 6 64 R an ge .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 19 01 – 20 13 19 01 – 20 08 19 01 – 20 08 19 01 – 20 03 19 01 – 20 14 19 01 – 20 03 A v er ag e N i .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 65 .6 64 63 68 .5 62 .5 62 .7 A d ju st ed R 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .9 30 .9 29 .9 31 .9 26 .9 34 .9 26 N O T E .— T h is ta b le re p or ts th e es ti m at ed lo n g- ru n ef fe ct s ac ro ss th e sa m e si x sp ec ifi ca ti on s sh ow n in ta b le 3, b u tw h en th e d ep en d en tv ar ia b le is th e V -D em m ea - su re of el ec to ra ld em oc ra cy .M y m ai n fi n d in gs ar e th e sa m e, an d ot h er fi n d in gs ar e si m ila r, w h ic h sh ow s th at m y re su lt s ar e ro b u st to co n si d er in g an al te rn at iv e m ea su re of d em oc ra cy . total effect, which is sometimes referred to as the long-runmultiplier, is thus the sum of these effects across each subsequent time period. Because these long-run multipliers are a better gauge of effect size than the raw coeffi- cients, in the main text I discuss these estimates only.17 The variables c and z are the main parameters of interest. They represent the estimated impact of nonelite and landlord capacity on democracy. The variable xlit21 is a row vector containing all the other covariates, and b is a column vector containing the corresponding coefficients. Note that all inde- pendent variables are lagged one time period to account for the fact that the impact of capacity on democracy is not likely to be instantaneous. The term mt denotes a year fixed effect for year t; its purpose is to account for shocks and time trends common toall countries.The term didenotes afixedeffect for country i, included to account for time-invariant and country-specific con- founders that are otherwise unobserved.18 This means that estimation re- lies only onwithin-country covariance, ignoring all cross-sectional variation (Firebaugh,Warner, andMassoglia 2013). Last,Eit represents the estimated error for the observation in country i and time t, adjusted for clustering at the country level.19 There is no foolproof way to draw causal inferences from observational data of this kind, but as one imperfect strategy, I also estimate all models on samples of varying intervals: an annual sample, on which most of the re- sults discussed below are based, as well as a sample split by 5-, 10-, 15- and 20-year intervals. These longer interval samples defend against the possibil- ity that results aremuddied by the reverse causal relationship. If a country’s democracy score affects disruptive capacity, the specification in equation 1 yields biased estimates of the impact of disruptive capacity on democracy. Since the Polity2 score is correlated with past values of itself, lagging dis- ruptive capacity one period is no protection (Bellemare, Masaki, and Pe- pinsky 2017). However, observing the same result at a 5- or 10-year remove 17 My choice to focus on the long-runmultipliers does not affect any conclusions I draw in this paper about the statistical significance of my estimates. In the results I discuss, short- and long-run estimates yield the same conclusions. 18 By construction, the lagged dependent variable and the effective error term are corre- lated, which leads to biased and inconsistent parameter estimates. This is known as Nickell’s bias. As Nickell (1981) shows, the resulting bias is on the order of 1/T, which means that for longer panels this need not be a serious concern. Regardless, to assuage concerns that my results are an artefact of this bias, I follow Papaioannou and Siourounis (2008) and restrict my annual sample to countries in which at least 20 years of data are available. The longer interval panels are then estimated on the same span of observa- tions, which means, for instance, that the minimum T for the five-year panel is 4. 19 A prerequisite of specifications such as the one in eq. (1) is that all constituent variables be stationary—that they not have unit roots (Box-Steffensmeier and Helgason 2016). I test all series for unit roots and conclude that there is enough evidence of stationarity to justify leaving all variables in their levels. Democracy and the Class Struggle 687 improves our confidence in the ordering underlying this association. Auto- correlation at this long a remove is significantly less severe.20 RESULTS Panel Regressions If my argument is correct, capitalist development incubates democracy by weakening antidemocratic landlords and strengthening prodemocratic non- elites. Across specifications and samples, I find strong support for both of these hypotheses. Landlord capacity inhibits democratization, and nonelite disruptive capacity advances it. Tables 3 and 4 present estimates from the one-year panel, and figure 2 shows my estimates from my preferred speci- fication on the longer interval panels.21 Note that while the estimates in ta- bles 3 and 4 are semistandardized, I reserve discussion of this dimension of the results to a later section. Here I focus on their statistical rather than po- litical significance. By now, a plethora of work has argued that strong landlords generally inhibit democratization (Moore 1966; Stephens 1989; Paige 1990; Ruesch- emeyer et al. 1992; Boix 2003; Ziblatt 2008, 2009; Ansell and Samuels 2014; Albertus 2017), and to my knowledge there is no scholarship that argues the opposite. AsMahoney (2003, p. 148) argues, “It is fair to say that theweaken- ing of landed elites is currently the most plausible explanation for why capi- talist development is associatedwith . . . democracy in cross-national quanti- tative studies.” The first of these findings is thus not particularly surprising, although its robustness bears mentioning. The negative long-run impact of landlord capacity is statistically significant ata5 0.01 in the bivariate, social forces, and preferred specifications (cols. 2, 3, and 6 of tables 3 and 4). As fig- ure 2 shows, this relationship holds whether we look 1, 5, 10, 15, or 20 years into the future. The second result, however, is novel. Quantitative work on democratiza- tion has not yet tested the hypothesis that nonelite capacity yields democ- racy, due either to theoretical confusion or to the absence of a credible mea- sure of long-run disruptive capacity. This article has sought to fill that gap. The bivariate association of disruptive capacitywith a country’s subsequent Polity2 or Electoral Democracy score (col. 1) is unambiguous: the higher dis- ruptive capacitymoves above its country-specificmean, thehigher a country’s 20 Granted, reverse causation is just one threat to identification. Both variables may also covary with some time-varying unobserved variable. This strategy is no defense against that possibility. 21 Tables 3 and 4 include measures of fit, but because the samples are not consistent across specifications, the statistics cannot be compared. American Journal of Sociology 688 F IG .2 .— T h is gr ap h ill u st ra te s th e st at is ti ca ls ig n ifi ca n ce of al lv ar ia b le s in m y p re fe rr ed sp ec ifi ca ti on ,i n sa m p le s of v ar yi n g re m ov e. T h e tw o p an el s co rr es p on d to th e tw o d if fe re n tm ea su re s of d em oc ra cy th at I ex am in e in th is p ap er .T h e y- ax is d en ot es th e in d ep en d en tv ar ia b le in q u es ti on . T h e x- ax is d en ot es th e in te rv al (in ye ar s) b et w ee n ob se rv at io n s. T h e p u rp os e of th is ex er ci se is to se e w h et h er re su lt s su rv iv e at lo n g re m ov e (e .g ., w h et h er d is ru p ti v e ca p ac it y at ti m e t 2 10 p re d ic ts th e P ol it y2 sc or e at ti m e t) .I f so ,t h is is b et te r (a lt h ou gh n ot at al ld is p os it iv e) ev id en ce th at th e m ai n as so ci at io n s I d is cu ss ar e ca u sa l. D is ru p ti v e ca p ac it y is p os it iv el y as so ci at ed w it h su b se q u en t le v el s of d em oc ra cy at al le xc ep t a 20 -y ea r re - m ov e. T h e st at is ti ca ls ig n ifi ca n ce of th is re su lt fl u ct u at es sl ig h tl y w h en E le ct or al D em oc ra cy is th e d ep en d en tv ar ia b le ,b u to n ly in th e 20 -y ea r sa m - p le d oe s it d ro p b el ow a 5 0∶ 10 .L an d lo rd p ow er is a co n si st en t p re d ic to r of su b se q u en t d em oc ra ti za ti on at sh or t an d lo n g re m ov e. democracy score in subsequent years.Columns3 and6of tables 3 and4 show that this association is not obviously spurious—either when I control for just the capacity of landed elites or when I include all other variables. In fact, for bothoutcomes,whencontrolling forall likelyconfounders forwhich thereare adequate data, the long-run estimate of disruptive capacity is larger and sig- nificant at a5 0.01. As figure 2 shows, this is mostly true in the longer inter- val samples as well. Whether we look 1, 5, 10, or 15 years into the future, the long-run impact of disruptive capacity is positive and statistically significant (at a 5 0.05 in all but the 10-year Electoral Democracy sample, where it is significant at a5 0.10). At 20 years, the estimate is still positive but statisti- cally imprecise. These are my key results, and the second is new, so one might wonder whether they are robust to alternative estimation choices. I find that both re- sults are statistically significant (at a 5 0.10, at least) when each specifica- tion is estimated on a consistent rather than unrestricted sample, when I vary the cutoff for the minimum number of nonmissing observations that must be present in a country to merit inclusion in the sample, when I use al- ternativemeasures of disruptive capacity,22when I addmeasures of involve- ment in war to the model, when I employ random rather than country fixed effects, orwhen I omit one country at a time (i.e., testingwhether resultswere driven by an outlying country). Separately, I find no evidence that adding interactions between key variables changes any of the conclusions I draw. When I use dichotomous measures of democracy to model democratic tran- sitions or consolidation rather than democratization, I find the class capac- ities matter as expected, except that the impact of disruptive capacity on consolidation, specifically, is quadratic rather than linear. Results do change if I omit either random or fixed effects or a lag of the dependent variable. In both cases, the effect of disruptive capacity on democracy is positive but no longer statistically significant. However, given the properties of these data, neither of these decisions is the right one. Countries inmy sample are hetero- geneous in ways that cannot be measured, and democracy is a strongly dy- namic process. Thus, the omission of fixed or random effects or of a lag of the dependent variable invites bias. How does themodernization account of democratization fare? I find little support for its staple mechanism. The long-run impact of GDP per capita is sometimes negative and sometimes positive, but never statistically signifi- cant at conventional levels. Most specifications furnish no evidence that ei- 22 Except that the estimated negative impact of landlord power is ambiguous when I add a count of public sector workers to the numerator of disruptive capacity (although only in the Polity2 models), perhaps because these data truncate the sample considerably. American Journal of Sociology 690 ther the level or antecedent growth rate of GDP per capita is positively as- sociated with levels of democracy. I find better evidence, however, for a dif- ferent channel by whichmodernization is supposed to matter: not by raising average incomes, but by increasing the average level of education. This re- sult is not statistically significant in models of the Polity2 score (or in col. 3 of either table, in which I only include themodernization variables), but the co- efficient estimate is sizeable, and the same estimate is statistically significant (at a 5 0.05) in the model of Electoral Democracy. The result surfaces at 10 years’ remove, too (in both models), although not in any other panel. If this estimate is correct, it suggests that, to the extent that development yields educational gains (but not income gains), it is associated with democratiza- tion.23 What of the inequality-based account of democracy? I find no sup- port for the redistributivist account, which supports recent work showing the same (Houle 2009; Haggard and Kaufman 2012; Soifer 2013; Slater et al. 2014). Whether in the simple inequality-based specification (col. 4) or in the preferred specification (col. 6), every estimate of the impact of the in- come inequality is positive, not negative. As figure 2 illustrates, this estimate is relatively more precise at longer remove: the long-run effect of income in- equality is statistically significant at a5 0.10 in the annual panel (Electoral Democracy) but significant at conventional levels at 5- and 10-year removes. All of this might be consideredweak support for the view that higher income inequality incubates democracy (Ansell and Samuels 2014). Yet, although these results fit Ansell and Samuels’s argument, by my reasoning earlier it is not clearwhat a positive estimate implies. Ansell andSamuels (2014) argue that income inequality strengthens the hand of a prodemocratic industrial elite, but I presented theoretical reasons to doubt that these elites have pro- democratic preferences.As I argued,Ansell andSamuels (2014) derive the in- dustrial elite’s preference for democracy by assuming that they have no in- fluence over autocratic states. But industrial elites have their hands on the levers of the economy. They do not need to possess the state to influence it. Neither is it clear that their collective action capacities are a function of the income distribution.What about other explanations?My results buttress the view that democracy tends to diffuse across borders (Wejnert 2005). Across specifications (and, note, net of the lagged value of democracy), the average democracy score of a country’s regional neighbors predicts subsequent de- mocratization. This coefficient is attenuated at longer remove, which may suggest that democracy diffuses in the short but not long run. 23 Of course, this approach gives us no ability to determine why: whether it is because educational attainment is an index of middle-class growth or because it incubates toler- ance (or the second via the first, or both). Democracy and the Class Struggle 691 Political Significance Of all the explanations I consider, the twin workhorses of the social forces account are the most consistently statistically significant results. However the model is specified, or whether the association is examined at annual or extended remove, the impact of disruptive capacity (positive) and landlord power (negative) is unmistakable. Other explanations figure, but evidence of their importance is weaker. This said, the fact that these associations are statistically noteworthy is not proof of their political significance.Howmuch do landlord power and disruptive capacity really matter? As noted already, the estimates presented in tables 3 and 4 are semistandardized, but the mag- nitudes are still not intuitive. How can one interpret a 4.1 increase in the Pol- ity2 score, or a 6-point decline in Electoral Democracy? Tobetter convey their political significance, I consider the impact of a sub- stantively important change in these two key variables. My measures sug- gest that developing world nonelites have always been weaker than their developed world counterparts and landed elites stronger than theirs. This is not surprising, given what we know about the economic history of the de- veloping world, but it invites a ready test of the significance of the social forces account. Had the developing world not been handicapped in this way, how much more democratic might it have been? By asking this question, I shed light on the puzzle posed earlier. By examining how much of the ob- served gap between the developed and developingworld is closed under this counterfactual, I offer one estimate of howwell the social forces account ex- plains the authoritarian bent of the developing world’s political history.24 To aid interpretation, I present this counterfactual in two stages.25 First, figure 3 plots this counterfactual trajectory in a single country, Brazil, and for only one of the two outcomes (Polity2).26 In the main inset, the bottom line illustrates Brazil’s predicted Polity2 score in the observed world. The topmost line plots counterfactual levels of democracy in a world in which 24 The use of counterfactuals in this sense should not be confused with the use of counterfactuals in the service of causal inference (Elster 1978; Lewis 2001; Morgan and Winship 2014). In fact, this kind of counterfactual simulation assumes accurate in- ference. Its purpose is to aid interpretation. 25 Note that the difference between the counterfactual trajectory of democracy and its predicted trajectory (i.e., the estimated trajectory of democracy when independent vari- ables are held at their observed values) registers two different magnitudes: (1) the coeffi- cients associated with any independent variables that take different values under the counterfactual and (2) the difference between the counterfactual trajectory of any inde- pendent variables that I change and its observed trajectory. 26 Brazil makes for a useful representative case because data are widely available over the span of my panel, and its estimated fixed effect is very close to the sample median. American Journal of Sociology 692 F IG .3 .— T h is gr ap h ill u st ra te s th e es ti m at ed d em oc ra ti c ga in s in a co u n te rf ac tu al B ra zi l, in w h ic h d is ru p ti v e ca p ac it y an d la n d lo rd p ow er fo llo w d ev el op ed w or ld tr aj ec to ri es .T h e re su lt s af fi rm th at th e es ti m at es fr om th e m ai n m od el s ar e p ra ct ic al ly an d n ot ju st st at is ti ca lly si gn ifi ca n t: a m ea n - in gf u lc h an ge in th e k ey in d ep en d en t v ar ia b le s im p lie s la rg e d em oc ra ti c ga in s. H ad B ra zi le sc ap ed th e d em oc ra cy -d is ab lin g co n se q u en ce s of la te d ev el op m en t, it w ou ld h av e ex p er ie n ce d 46 ad d it io n al ye ar s of d em oc ra cy . Brazilian nonelites accumulated disruptive capacities on an advancedworld pattern (the dotted line in the bottom left inset) and landlords lost power as they did in the average developed country (the dotted line in the bottom right inset).As is evident, the estimated consequences are significant: Brazilwould have been considerablymore democratic. Themost intuitiveway to summa- rize these gains is to quantify the area shaded infigure 3. This area represents the additional years of democracy that Brazil would have enjoyed had its landed elites been weaker and its nonelites stronger.27 In these terms, the shaded gains amount to about 46 democracy-years. This represents roughly an 83% improvement over its observed history, which is equivalent to ob- serving that Brazil would have been close to twice as democratic.28 Is Brazil idiosyncratic? Figure 4 plots the consequences of the same coun- terfactual across all developing countries and also extends the exercise to V- Dem’s alternative measure. Gains are comparably significant. The average developing country gains around 29 democracy-years (Polity2),29 which represents about a 54% improvement over the predicted trajectory in the observed world.30 Figure 4 also makes it possible to estimate what this im- provement represents, as a proportion of the gap between the developed and the advanced world. As the graph shows, at every point in the modern pe- riod, the developing world (the bottommost line) is less democratic than the developed world (the topmost). As before, I quantify this gap by calcu- lating the area between the two curves, which suggests that the average de- veloping country experiences around 49 fewer years of democracy (35 fewer, by V-Dem’s measure).We can thus ask, Howmuch of this gap is closed, in a counterfactual world in which all developing world elites and nonelites lost or gained capacities by developed world patterns? By this measure, around 57%of the gap between the advanced anddevelopingworlds is explained by 27 These areas cannot be computed analytically, but there are several numerical methods that can substitute. I used Simpson’s rule, which approximates the integral using qua- dratic polynomials over short intervals. 28 Howmuch of this improvement is due to the strengthening of nonelites and howmuch to the weakening of landed elites? Results from these counterfactuals run separately sug- gest that about 63% are due to the early demise of landlords and about 37% to the earlier and more significant accumulation of disruptive capacity. 29 If the outcome is V-Dem’s Electoral Democracy measure and not the Polity2 score, these numbers are 19 democracy-years and 52%, respectively. Remember that the Elec- toral Democracy sample is truncated by V-Dem’s later starting date, so a given percent- age gain translates to smaller raw gains in this sample. 30 To summarize trends across all developing countries, I fit a locally weighted nonpara- metric smooth to the data. This choice is arbitrary, but other choices do not make any difference to the conclusions here. If I fit the data with simple linear best-fit lines, or if estimate the average score in a given year by the average across all countries, or if I vary the weights in the locally weighted smooth, neither this estimate nor the estimate dis- cussed at the end of this paragraph changes substantially. American Journal of Sociology 694 the capacity handicaps of late development (54%, byV-Dem’smeasure). Put another way, however Imeasure it, slightlymore than half of the developing world’s democratic deficit is explained by the diminished power of its non- elites and the longevity of its landed classes. FIG. 4.—This graph illustrates the estimated democratic gains in a counterfactual world in which all developing countries escaped the disabling features of their late devel- opment (i.e., in which disruptive capacity and landlord power all followed developed world trajectories). It generalizes the results plotted in figure 3 beyondBrazil (and beyond the Polity2 score). These gains can be compared with the actual trajectory of the ad- vanced world over this period. As discussed in the main text, roughly 50%–60% of the gap between the developing and advanced world is closed under this counterfactual. Democracy and the Class Struggle 695 CONCLUSION The rise of democracy transformed the distribution of power, and in this sense inaugurated a new epoch in human history. Social scientists have long believed that this new epoch had something to dowith the rise of capitalism, but the specific arguments have varied. One wing of this endogenous tradi- tion argued that capitalist developmentmattered because of the class capac- ities it eroded and incubated—because it weakened landlords, democracy’s most intransigent opponents, and strengthened nonelites, democracy’s most committed partisans. Yet the existing scholarship that argues this point has been case study based, and its theoretical foundations have been largely ig- nored by recent quantitative work. In this article, I made two main contributions. First, I reintroduced the social forces view into the contemporary debate by presenting a capacity- centered model of the democratic transition. Existing models of the transi- tion game either assume away the capacities of social actors towinwhat they seek or they rely on an ingenuous account of collective action. I proposed a better model, which is centered on the concept of disruptive capacity. This helps explain why elites always have more power than nonelites, why the balance of power might shift with development, and why this shift leads to democracy. Second, I proposed the first long-run quantitative test of the so- cial forces account. I gathered data on the composition of the labor force in almost 200 countries between the late 19th century and the present, which I used to construct an aggregate measure of nonelite disruptive capacity. This measure is not perfect, but barring significant progress in the theory and measurement of collective action, it is the best that students of cross- national democratization can do. I showed strong support for the hypothe- sis that nonelites drove democratization and confirmed existingwisdom that landlords imperiled it. To be clear, it is not exactly correct to advertisemy results as evidence that class capacities caused democratization. I have used this language as short- hand, but my results are consistent with two other explanations. It could be that countries on the verge of democratic transitions aremore likely to adopt policies that cluster nonelites in high-capacity employment or that under- mine landlords. In other words, democracy might explain capacity rather than capacity, democracy. The fact that antecedent levels of disruptive ca- pacity predict democracy at a longer remove is encouraging, but this is not proof. Alternatively, it is possible that an omitted variable explains the coin- cidence of transition and antecedent capacity. Acemoglu et al. (2008) argued that both development and democracy were the consequence of antecedent institutional changes, which are thus the real cause. Note that the implica- tions of this argument for the social forces account need not be dramatic. If the point is just that favorable institutional changes detonate capitalist de- American Journal of Sociology 696 velopment, capacities may still be the proximate drivers of democratization. With no obviousway of capturing these institutional conjunctures quantita- tively, I have to assume that they are residual to the patterns I explain.None- theless, partisans of the inferential revolution are correct to demand better. This is surely a fruitful area for future research. Otherwise, future work might also explore improvements to the model of the transition game I proposed. Consider two. First, I assumed that non- elites always prefer democracy to dictatorship and that the intensity of these preferences is invariant. In my view, the incentive-centered accounts of de- mocratization understate the benefits of democratization to nonelites, but assuming that they always demand democracy with equal intensity might make the opposite mistake. Of course, the measurement of incentives is an enormous challenge. Existingwork usesmeasures of national-level inequal- ity, which requires that we make heroic assumptions about what nonelites know about their relativewell-being.31 Second, I assumed that elite capacity was invariant. This allowed me to argue that nonelite disruptive capacity was the sole determinant of the balance of power, but this may not be real- istic. My model assumed that elites exercise power through disinvestment (or exit), but there is a long tradition of scholarship that emphasizes explicit forms of organization (or voice). Future research might consider whether there is some way of capturing the facility with which elites organize. As for the fate of democracy today, what can this article offer? For one, recent work has disputed the credentials of the democracies that now pep- per the developingworld. These governments are formally democratic, they argue, but democracy may flourish only because it is no longer bears on the distribution of power (Huber, Rueschemeyer, and Stephens 1997; Schmitter 2013; Roberts 2016; Rodrik 2016a). If recent democratizations have not yielded substantive gains, why? One possibility is that democratization in the postcolonial world has taken a different form than democratization in the first, as several authors have argued or implied (Soifer 2013; Slater et al. 2014; Rodrik 2016a; Haggard andKaufman 2016). Future workmight relax the typical assumption that the effect of all covariates is homogeneous; or, more ambitiously, it might synthesize and test explanations of why postco- 31 That is to say, for the level of inequality to be a good proxy for nonelite incentives, nonelites should be aware of how unequal their country is relative to past years and even, depending on the specification, to other years in other countries. At least two facts about income inequality make this tricky. First, it does not usually vary very dramatically over time. Relying on this axis of variation requires believing that individuals discern move- ments of a few points in the Gini coefficient. Second, for all but themost recent period, we have known very little about patterns in cross-national inequality. Using cross-national variation to test the hypothesis requires that we believe nonelites had data that social sci- entists did not. See Bermeo (2010), who makes a similar argument when disputing the redistributivist account of the Portuguese transition to democracy Democracy and the Class Struggle 697 lonial democratization has been different. Moreover, if certain democracies have proved more empowering, the explanation may lie in the character of antecedentdemocratization.Collier (1999)andHaggardandKaufman(2012) have noted that transitions takemany paths, but there is surelymore to learn about the consequences of this heterogeneity (Fishman and Lizardo 2013; Albertus and Menaldo 2014; Haggard and Kaufman 2016; Kadivar 2018). Second, and separately, recent events have led some to doubt the future of democracy in the developed world (Foa and Mounk 2016). The rise of pop- ulist authoritarians in thesemature democracies is, some argue, a sure sign of their brittleness. Optimistically, my results imply that these challenges are destined to be short-lived. The landlord class is dead, the citizenry are edu- cated, and democracy reigns in their neighbors. Yet there may be grounds for pessimism too. The collapse of the labormovement has surely contributed to the oligarchic and populist flavor of present-day politics. The health of democracy may depend on that movement’s ability to rebuild currently de- funct class capacities. Whatever the errors of my approach in this article, I hope what is clear is that key insights from the comparative-historical tra- dition have been missing from the resurgent literature on democracy’s ori- gins. The main casualty of this omission has been our approach to the prob- lem of nonelite collective action. Leading scholars have proposed models that make ingenuous assumptions (Ansell and Samuels 2014), or they have abjured modeling nonelite capacity altogether (Boix 2003; Acemoglu and Robinson 2006). Others have noticed this problem, but my article is the first to propose both an abstract solution and a strategy for testing it over the long run. Future work will no doubt show better ways to both ends, but in doing so this article will have succeeded in its aim, which is to reintroduce scholars of the transition game to enduring sociological insights about the ability or inability of nonelites to remake the world around them. REFERENCES Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared. 2009. “Re- evaluating the Modernization Hypothesis.” Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (8): 1043–58. Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. Acemoglu, Daron, James Robinson, Simon Johnson, and Pierre Yared. 2008. “Income and Democracy.” American Economic Review 98 (3): 808–42. Aidt, Toke S., and Peter S. Jensen. 2014. “Workers of theWorld, Unite! Franchise Exten- sions and the Threat of Revolution in Europe, 1820–1938.” European Economic Re- view 72:52–75. Alavi, H. 1972. “The State in Post-Colonial Societies: Pakistan and Bangladesh.” New Left Review 74:59–81. Albertus, Michael. 2017. “Landowners and Democracy: The Social Origins of Democ- racy Reconsidered.” World Politics 69 (2): 233–76. American Journal of Sociology 698 Albertus, Michael, and Victor A.Menaldo. 2014. “Gaming Democracy: Elite Dominance during Transition and Prospects for Redistribution.” British Journal of Political Sci- ence 44 (3): 575–603. Ansell, Ben W., and David J. Samuels. 2014. Inequality and Democratization: An Elite- Competition Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Babones, Salvatore J., and María José Alvarez-Rivadulla. 2007. “Standardized Income Inequality Data for Use in Cross-National Research.” Sociological Inquiry 77 (1): 3–22. Banks, Arthur S., and Kenneth A. Wilson. 2015. Cross-National Time-Series Data Ar- chive. Jerusalem: Center for Social Analysis, SUNY. Beck, Nathaniel, and Jonathan N. Katz. 2011. “Modeling Dynamics in Time-Series- Cross-Section Political Economy Data.” Annual Review of Political Science 14 (1): 331–52. Bellemare, Marc F., Takaaki Masaki, and Thomas B. Pepinsky. 2017. “Lagged Explan- atory Variables and the Estimation of Causal Effect.” Journal of Politics 79 (3): 949– 63. Benhabib, Jess, Alejandro Corvalan, and Mark M. Spiegel. 2011. Reestablishing the Income-Democracy Nexus. Working Paper No. 16832. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.: Bermeo, Nancy. 1997. “Myths of Moderation: Confrontation and Conflict during Dem- ocratic Transitions.” Comparative Politics 29 (3): 305–22. ———. 2010. “Interests, Inequality, and Illusion in the Choice for Fair Elections.” Com- parative Political Studies 43 (8): 1119–47. Boix, Carles. 2003. Democracy and Redistribution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ———. 2011. “Democracy, Development, and the International System.” American Po- litical Science Review 105 (4): 809–28. Bollen, Kenneth. 1983. “World System Position, Dependency, and Democracy: The Cross-National Evidence.” American Sociological Review 48 (4): 468–79. Bollen, Kenneth A., and Robert W. Jackman. 1985. “Political Democracy and the Size Distribution of Income.” American Sociological Review 50 (4): 438–57. Bourguignon, François, and Christian Morrisson. 2002. “Inequality among World Citi- zens: 1820–1992.” American Economic Review 92 (4): 727–44. Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. 1987. Democracy and Capitalism: Property, Com- munity, and the Contradictions of Modern Social Thought. New York: Basic Books. Box-Steffensmeier, Janet, andAgnar Freyr Helgason. 2016. “Introduction to Symposium on Time Series Error Correction Methods in Political Science.” Political Analysis 24 (1): 1–2. Caraway, Teri L., Stephanie J. Rickard, and Mark S. Anner. 2012. “International Nego- tiations and Domestic Politics: The Case of IMF LaborMarket Conditionality.” Inter- national Organization 66 (1): 27–61. Cheibub, José Antonio, Jennifer Gandhi, and James Raymond Vreeland. 2010. “Democ- racy and Dictatorship Revisited.” Public Choice 143 (1): 67–101. Collier, Ruth Berins. 1999. Paths toward Democracy: The Working Class and Elites in Western Europe and South America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Coppedge, Michael, Staffan Lindberg, Svend-Erik Skaaning, and Jan Teorell. 2016. “Measuring High Level Democratic Principles Using the V-Dem Data.” International Political Science Review 37 (5): 580–93. Cutright, P. 1963. “National Political Development: Measurement and Analysis.” Amer- ican Sociological Review 28: 253–264. De Boef, Suzanna, and Luke Keele. 2008. “Taking Time Seriously.”American Journal of Political Science 52 (1): 184–200. Dean, A. 2015. “Power over Profits: The Political Economy ofWorkers andWages.”Pol- itics and Society 43 (3): 333–60. Democracy and the Class Struggle 699 Diamond, Larry, and Juan J. Linz. 1995. Politics in Developing Countries: Comparing Experiences with Democracy. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner. Du Bois, W. E. B. (1935) 1998. Black Reconstruction in America, 1860–1880, edited by David Levering Lewis. New York: Free Press. Durkheim, Émile. 2014. The Division of Labor in Society, edited by Steven Lukes. New York: Free Press. Eley, Geoff. 2002.ForgingDemocracy: TheHistory of the Left inEurope, 1850–2000. Ox- ford: Oxford University Press. Elster, Jon. 1978. Logic and Society: Contradictions and Possible Worlds. New York: Wiley & Sons. Esping-Andersen, Gøsta. 1990. The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity Press. Firebaugh, Glenn, CodyWarner, andMichael Massoglia. 2013. “Fixed Effects, Random Effects, and Hybrid Models for Causal Analysis.” Pp. 113–32 in Handbook of Causal Analysis for Social Research, edited by Stephen L.Morgan. Dordrecht: SpringerNeth- erlands. Fishman, Robert M., and Omar Lizardo. 2013. “How Macro-Historical Change Shapes Cultural Taste: Legacies of Democratization in Spain and Portugal.” American Socio- logical Review 78 (2): 213–39. Foa, Roberto Stefan, and Yascha Mounk. 2016. “The Democratic Disconnect.” Journal of Democracy 27 (3): 5–17. Garrett, Geoffrey. 1998. Partisan Politics in the Global Economy. Cambridge: Cam- bridge University Press. Gerschenkron, Alexander. 1966. Bread and Democracy in Germany. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cor- nell University Press. Haggard, Stephan, and Robert R. Kaufman. 2012. “Inequality and Regime Change: Democratic Transitions and the Stability of Democratic Rule.”American Political Sci- ence Review 106 (3): 495–516. ———. 2016. Dictators and Democrats: Masses, Elites, and Regime Change. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Hibbs, Douglas A. 1978. “On the Political Economy of Long-Run Trends in Strike Activ- ity.” British Journal of Political Science 8 (2): 153–75. Hicks, Alexander M. 1999. Social Democracy and Welfare Capitalism: A Century of In- come Security Politics. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. Higley, John, and Michael G. Burton. 1989. “The Elite Variable in Democratic Transi- tions and Breakdowns.” American Sociological Review 54:17–32. Houle, Christian. 2009. “Inequality and Democracy.” World Politics 61 (4): 589–622. Huber, Evelyne, Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and JohnD. Stephens. 1997. “The Paradoxes of Contemporary Democracy: Formal, Participatory, and Social Dimensions.” Compar- ative Politics 29 (3): 323–42. Hung, Ho-fung, and Daniel Thompson. 2016. “Money Supply, Class Power, and Infla- tion: Monetarism Reassessed.” American Sociological Review 81 (3): 447–66. Inglehart, Ronald, and ChristianWelzel. 2010. “Changing Mass Priorities: The Link be- tween Modernization and Democracy.” Perspectives on Politics 8 (2): 551–67. Kadivar, Mohammad Ali. 2018. “Mass Mobilization and the Durability of New Democ- racies.” American Sociological Review 83 (2): 390–417. Kadivar, Mohammad Ali, and Neal Caren. 2016. “Disruptive Democratization: Conten- tious Events and Liberalizing Outcomes Globally, 1990–2004.” Social Forces 94 (3): 975–96. Karl, Terry Lynn. 1990. “Dilemmas of Democratization in Latin America.” Comparative Politics 23 (1): 1–21. Kautsky, Karl. 1996. Road to Power: Political Reflections on Growing into the Revolu- tion, edited by John H. Kautsky. Humanity Books. American Journal of Sociology 700 Keck, Margaret E. 1995. The Workers’ Party and Democratization in Brazil. New Ha- ven, Conn.: Yale University Press. Keele, Luke, and Nathan J. Kelly. 2006. “Dynamic Models for Dynamic Theories: The Ins and Outs of Lagged Dependent Variables.” Political Analysis 14 (2): 186–205. Kerrissey, Jasmine. 2015. “Collective Labor Rights and Income Inequality.” American Sociological Review 80 (3): 626–53. Kimeldorf, Howard. 2013. “Worker Replacement Costs and Unionization Origins of the U.S. Labor Movement.” American Sociological Review 78 (6): 1033–62. Korpi, Walter. 1974. “Conflict, Power and Relative Deprivation.” American Political Science Review 68 (4): 1569–78. ———. 1983. The Democratic Class Struggle. London: Routledge Kegan & Paul. ———. 2006. “Power Resources andEmployer-Centered Approaches in Explanations of Welfare States and Varieties of Capitalism: Protagonists, Consenters, and Antago- nists.” World Politics 58 (2): 167–206. Kraus, Jon. 2007. Trade Unions and the Coming of Democracy. London: Palgrave Mac- millan. Kristal, Tali. 2010. “GoodTimes, BadTimes: Postwar Labor’s Share ofNational Income in Capitalist Democracies.” American Sociological Review 75 (5): 729–63. ———. 2013. “The Capitalist Machine: Computerization, Workers’ Power, and the De- cline in Labor’s Share within U.S. Industries.” American Sociological Review 78 (3): 361–89. Lewis, David K. 2001. Counterfactuals, 2d ed. Malden, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell. Lindblom, Charles. 1977. Politics and Markets. New York: Basic Books. ———. 1982. “The Market as Prison.” Journal of Politics 44 (2): 324–36. Linz, Professor Juan J., and Professor Alfred Stepan. 1978. The Breakdown of Demo- cratic Regimes. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Lipset, S. M. 1959. “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Development and Political Legitimacy.” American Political Science Review 53 (1): 69–105. Lodhi, Abdul Qaiyum, andCharles Tilly. 1973. “Urbanization, Crime, andCollective Vi- olence in 19th-Century France.” American Journal of Sociology 79 (2): 296–318. Mahoney, James. 2003. “Knowledge Accumulation in Comparative Historical Work: The Case of Democracy and Authoritarianism.” Pp. 131–74 in Comparative Historical Analysis in the Social Sciences, edited by JamesMahoney andDietrich Rueschemeyer. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Marshall, Monty, Ted Gurr, and Keith Jaggers. 2014. “Polity IV Project: Polity Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800–2013.” Dataset User’s Manual. Vienna, Va. Center for Systemic Peace. Marx,Karl. 1852.TheEighteenthBrumaire of LouisBonaparte.NewYork:DieRevolution. Meltzer, Allan H., and Scott F. Richard. 1981. “ARational Theory of the Size of Govern- ment.” Journal of Political Economy 89 (5): 914–27. Miller, Michael K. 2012. “Economic Development, Violent Leader Removal, and De- mocratization.” American Journal of Political Science 56 (4): 1002–20. Mitchell, B. R. 2013. International Historical Statistics, 1750–2010. Basingstoke, Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan. Moore, Barrington. 1966. Social Origins of Dictatorship andDemocracy: Lord and Peas- ant in the Making of the Modern World. Boston: Beacon Press. Morgan, Stephen L., and Christopher Winship. 2014. Counterfactuals and Causal Infer- ence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Morrisson, Christian, and FabriceMurtin. 2009. “The Century of Education.” Journal of Human Capital 3 (1): 1–42. Mosley, Layna, and Saika Uno. 2007. “Racing to the Bottom or Climbing to the Top? Economic Globalization and Collective Labor Rights.” Comparative Political Studies 40 (8): 923–48. Democracy and the Class Struggle 701 Muller, Edward N. 1988. “Democracy, Economic Development, and Income Inequal- ity.” American Sociological Review 53 (1): 50–68. Murtin, Fabrice, and Romain Wacziarg. 2014. “The Democratic Transition.” Journal of Economic Growth 19 (2): 141–81. Nickell, Stephen. 1981. “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects.” Econometrica 49 (6): 1417–26. O’Donnell, Guillermo, Philippe C. Schmitter, and Laurence Whitehead. 1986. Transi- tions from Authoritarian Rule. Vol. 4: Tentative Conclusions about Uncertain Democ- racies. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Offe, Claus. 1984. Contradictions of the Welfare State. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Paige, Jeffery M. 1990. “The Social Origins of Dictatorship, Democracy, and Socialist Revolution in Central America.” Journal of Developing Societies 6:37–42. Papaioannou, Elias, and Gregorios Siourounis. 2008. “Democratisation and Growth.” Economic Journal 118 (532): 1520–51. Parsons, Talcott. 1964. “Evolutionary Universals in Society.” American Sociological Re- view 29 (3): 339–57. Pemstein, Daniel, Kyle L. Marquardt, Eitan Tzelgov, Yi-ting Wang, and Farhad Miri. 2015. “The V-DemMeasurement Model: Latent Variable Analysis for Cross-National and Cross-Temporal Expert-Coded Data.” Varieties of Democracy Institute Working Paper 2015 (21). Perrone, Luca, Erik Olin Wright, and Larry J. Griffin. 1984. “Positional Power, Strikes and Wages.” American Sociological Review 49 (3): 412–26. Piven, Frances Fox, and Richard Cloward. 1978. Poor People’s Movements: Why They Succeed, How They Fail. New York: Vintage. Przeworski, Adam. 1986. Capitalism and Social Democracy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ———. 2000.Democracy and Development: Political Institutions andWell-Being in the World, 1950–1990. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ———. 2009. “Conquered or Granted? A History of Suffrage Extensions.” British Jour- nal of Political Science 39 (2): 291–321. Przeworski, Adam, and Limongi Neto. 1997. “Modernization: Theories and Facts.” World Politics 49 (2): 155–83. Roberts, Kenneth M. 2016. “Democracy in the Developing World: Challenges of Sur- vival and Significance.” Studies in Comparative International Development 51 (1): 32–49. Robinson, James A. 2006. “Economic Development and Democracy.” Annual Review of Political Science 9 (1): 503–27. Rodrik, Dani. 2016a. “Is Liberal Democracy Feasible in Developing Countries?” Studies in Comparative International Development 51:50–59. ———. 2016b. “Premature Deindustrialization.” Journal of Economic Growth 1 (21): 1–33. Rosenberg, Arthur. 1939.Democracy and Socialism: A Contribution to the Political His- tory of the Past 150 Years. London: G. Bell & Sons. Rubin, BethA. 1986. “Class Struggle American Style: Unions, Strikes andWages.”Amer- ican Sociological Review 51 (5): 618–33. Rudra, Nita. 2002. “Globalization and the Decline of the Welfare State in Less-Developed Countries.” International Organization 56 (2): 411–45. Rueschemeyer, Dietrich, Evelyne Huber Stephens, and John D. Stephens. 1992.Capital- ist Development and Democracy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Scheve, Kenneth, andDavid Stasavage. 2009. “Institutions, Partisanship, and Inequality in the Long Run.” World Politics 61 (2): 215–53. Schmitter, Philippe C. 2013. “Reflections on ‘Transitology’—Before and After.” Pp. 71– 86 in Reflections on Uneven Democracies: The Legacy of Guillermo O’Donnell, edited American Journal of Sociology 702 by Daniel M. Brinks, Marcelo Leiras, and Scott Mainwaring. Baltimore: Johns Hop- kins University Press. Schwartz, Michael. 1988. Radical Protest and Social Structure: The Southern Farmers’ Alliance and Cotton Tenancy, 1880–1890. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Slater, Dan. 2009. “Revolutions, Crackdowns, and Quiescence: Communal Elites and Democratic Mobilization in Southeast Asia.” American Journal of Sociology 115 (1): 203–54. Slater, Dan, Benjamin Smith, andGautamNair. 2014. “EconomicOrigins of Democratic Breakdown? The Redistributive Model and the Postcolonial State.” Perspectives on Politics 12 (2): 353–74. Snyder, David, and Charles Tilly. 1972. “Hardship and Collective Violence in France, 1830 to 1960.” American Sociological Review 37 (5): 520–32. Soifer, Hillel David. 2013. “State Power and the Economic Origins of Democracy.” Stud- ies in Comparative International Development 48 (1): 1–22. Solt, Frederick. 2014. “The Standardized World Income Inequality Database.” SWIID Version 5.0. Somers, Margaret R. 1993. “Citizenship and the Place of the Public Sphere: Law, Com- munity, and Political Culture in the Transition to Democracy.” American Sociological Review 58 (5): 587–620. Southworth, Caleb, and Judith Stepan-Norris. 2009. “American Trade Unions and Data Limitations: A New Agenda for Labor Studies.” Annual Review of Sociology 35:297– 320. Stepan-Norris, Judith, and Caleb Southworth. 2010. “Rival Unionism and Membership Growth in the United States, 1900 to 2005: A Special Case of Inter-organizational Competition.” American Sociological Review 75 (2): 227–51. Stephens, John D. 1979. The Transition fromCapitalism to Socialism. London: Palgrave Macmillan. ———. 1989. “Democratic Transition and Breakdown in Western Europe, 1870–1939: A Test of the Moore Thesis.” American Journal of Sociology 94 (5): 1019–77. Swank, Duane. 1992. “Politics and the Structural Dependence of the State in Democratic Capitalist Nations.” American Political Science Review 86 (1): 38. Teorell, Jan. 2010. Determinants of Democratization: Explaining Regime Change in the World, 1972–2006. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Therborn, Goran. 1977. “The Rule of Capital and the Rise of Democracy.”New Left Re- view 103:3–41. Tilly, Charles. 1973. “DoesModernizationBreedRevolution?”Comparative Politics 5 (3): 425–47. Timmer, Marcel P., Gaaitzen de Vries, and Klaas de Vries. 2014. Patterns of Structural Change in Developing Countries. GGDC Research Memorandum 149. Treisman, Daniel. 2015. “Income, Democracy, and Leader Turnover.”American Journal of Political Science 59 (4): 927–42. Vanhanen, Tatu. 2003.Democratization and Power Resources 1850 to 2000. Finnish So- cial Science Data Archive. Volscho, ThomasW., andNathan J. Kelly. 2012. “The Rise of the Super-Rich Power Re- sources, Taxes, Financial Markets, and the Dynamics of the Top 1 Percent, 1949 to 2008.” American Sociological Review 77 (5): 679–99. Wallace, Michael, Larry J. Griffin, and Beth A. Rubin. 1989. “The Positional Power of American Labor, 1963–1977.” American Sociological Review 54 (2): 197–214. Wejnert, Barbara. 2005. “Diffusion, Development, and Democracy, 1800–1999.” Amer- ican Sociological Review 70 (1): 53–81. Welzel, Christian, and Ronald Inglehart. 2005. Modernization, Cultural Change, and Democracy: The Human Development Sequence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Democracy and the Class Struggle 703 Winters, JeffreyAlan. 1996.Power inMotion: CapitalMobility and the Indonesian State. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. Wood, Elisabeth Jean. 2001. “An Insurgent Path to Democracy: Popular Mobilization, Economic Interests, and Regime Transition in South Africa and El Salvador.” Com- parative Political Studies 34 (8): 862–88. Woodberry, Robert D. 2012. “The Missionary Roots of Liberal Democracy.” American Political Science Review 106 (2): 244–74. Yang, David D. 2007. “Classing Ethnicity: Class, Ethnicity, and the Mass Politics of Taiwan’s Democratic Transition.” World Politics 59 (4): 503–38. Zeitlin, Maurice. 1984. The Civil Wars in Chile. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Ziblatt, Daniel. 2008. “Does Landholding Inequality Block Democratization?” World Politics 60 (4): 610–41. ———. 2009. “Shaping Democratic Practice and the Causes of Electoral Fraud: The Case of Nineteenth-Century Germany.” American Political Science Review 103 (1): 1–21. ———. 2017.Conservative Parties and the Birth of Democracy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. American Journal of Sociology 704 Copyright of American Journal of Sociology is the property of University of Chicago and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.