Yim_JournMarket_2012_QNqm.pdf
aIaFTbY50QyXJUvuo7P1fz0bFD5W-Yim_JournMarket_2012_QNqm.pdf.plain.html

Chi Kin (Bennett) Yim, Kimmy Wa Chan, & Simon S.K. Lam Do Customers and Employees Enjoy Service Participation? Synergistic Effects of Self- and Other-Efficacy Extant research confirms the importance of value cocreation through customer participation (CP), but relatively little is known about whether and how it creates an enjoyable experience for customers and service employees and the consequential outcomes of this positive affective experience. This study applies the concept of flow as an overarching framework and draws theoretical support from social cognitive theory, particularly its extension (i.e., the conceptual model of relational efficacy beliefs), to examine how customers and employees derive enjoyment from CP conditional on their perceived efficacy of themselves (self-efficacy [SE]) and their partners (other-efficacy [OE]) in financial services. Empirical results from 223 client–financial adviser dyads confirm that participation enjoyment, in addition to economic and relational values, mediates the impact of CP on participants’ satisfaction evaluations, with SE positively moderating CP’s impact on participation enjoyment. The synergistic effect of SE and OE on participation enjoyment also differs for clients versus financial advisers: Even incongruent levels of SE and OE can enhance participation enjoyment as long as they help validate role expectations of the respective participants. Keywords: customer participation, value cocreation, participation enjoyment, self-efficacy, other-efficacy, financial services Chi Kin (Bennett) Yim is Professor of Marketing (e-mail: yim@ business. hku. hk), and Simon S.K. Lam is Professor of Management (e-mail: simonlam@ business.hku.hk), School of Business, University of Hong Kong. Kimmy Wa Chan is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Department of Manage- ment and Marketing, Faculty of Business, Hong Kong Polytechnic Univer- sity (e-mail: mskimmy@polyu.edu.hk). This research was partially funded by a Hong Kong SAR RGC research grant (HKU 7675/05H) awarded to the first author. The authors thank three anonymous JM reviewers for their helpful and constructive comments. Cornelia Pechmann served as area editor for this article. © 2012, American Marketing Association ISSN: 0022-2429 (print), 1547-7185 (electronic) Journal of Marketing Volume 76 (November 2012), 121 –140121 Customer participation (CP) in the service productionand delivery process is gaining credence in both aca-demic writing and real-world practices because it is believed to help customers achieve higher service quality and more service control (Dabholkar 1990; Xie, Bagozzi, and Troye 2008) and to benefit firms through increased customer satisfaction and productivity gains (Mills and Morris 1986). The service-dominant logic (Vargo and Lusch 2004, 2006) further encourages the exploration of CP as a competitive advantage (Bendapudi and Leone 2003). This new logic suggests viewing customers as proactive cocreators rather than passive receivers of value and urging companies to take up the role of facilitators of the value cocreation process (Payne, Storbacka, and Frow 2008). Specifically, a key premise of this logic is that “CP alone is not the key to customer satisfaction but that value cocreation is what mat- ters” (Chan, Yim, and Lam 2010, p. 49). In their study on the mediating role of two extrinsic values (economic and relational), Chan, Yim, and Lam (2010) find that CP offers economic benefits such as customized services, better qual- ity, and more control to customers and strengthens rela- tional bonds between customers and employees, but it also increases employees’ job stress. The mediating role of value cocreation at least partly explains previous mixed and inconsistent findings (e.g., Bendapudi and Leone 2003; Cermak, File, and Prince 1994; Ennew and Binks 1999) on the effect of CP on customer satisfaction and loyalty. However, participation can also be intrinsically attrac- tive to customers who derive enjoyment from participating in service delivery with or without the usual incentives of discounts or improved service quality (Bateson 1985; Bit- ner et al. 1997; Dabholkar 1990). Service research also sug- gests that service customers require not only extrinsic but also intrinsic rewards or psychological benefits (e.g., fun, enjoyment) as motivations for participation in self-service or coproduction service tasks (Dabholkar 1990; Dabholkar and Bagozzi 2002; Etgar 2008; Schneider and Bowen 1995). These findings are consistent with the premise of experiential consumption research (Arnould and Thompson 2005; Holbrook and Hirschman 1982), which stresses the importance of considering the hedonic pursuit of pleasure in the experience of consumption that is considered intrinsi- cally rewarding. Taken together, although recent research (e.g., Chan, Yim, and Lam 2010) has confirmed the cocre- ation of utilitarian or extrinsic values through CP, still little is known about whether and how CP can create psychologi- cal benefits (i.e., an enjoyable experience) for customers and service employees and the consequential outcomes of this positive affective experience. Furthermore, CP has arguably created a challenging sit- uation for both customers and employees, who must take responsibility for their new roles and tasks in various ser- vice contexts (e.g., health insurance service [McKee, Sim- mers, and Licata 2006], online self-service [Van Beuningen et al. 2009], financial services [Chan, Yim, and Lam 2010]). Customers’ and employees’ ability and skills in dealing with the challenges brought on by CP thus introduce an issue of confidence and perceived capability (or efficacy) in participating, which, according to flow theory (Csikszent- mihalyi 1975, 1990), affects the creation of an enjoyable experience. “Flow” is an experiential state characterized by enjoyment or experience of the activity as intrinsically rewarding. Enjoyable activities provide value; they offer an experience that people performing the activities for their own sake will feel satisfied with, try to maintain, and strive to repeat (Belk, Ger, and Askegaard 2000). The flow state is more likely to be achieved when perceived challenges are commensurate with perceived capacities for actions (Csik- szentmihalyi and LeFevre 1989; Nakamura and Csikszent- mihalyi 2002). Although recent studies on customers’ attitudes toward self-service technologies1 (Meuter et al. 2005; Van Beunin- gen et al. 2009) and service participation (McKee, Sim- mers, and Licata 2006; Xie, Bagozzi, and Troye 2008) have examined self-appraisal of capabilities, or self-efficacy (SE), they have treated it primarily as an antecedent to CP. This is in contrast with its prevalent treatment as a modera- tor in other literature, such as health/occupational health/ stress (e.g., Jex and Bliese 1999; May et al. 1997), organi- zational behavior/management (e.g., Dierdorff, Surface, and Brown 2010), and education (e.g., Pinquart, Sil- bereisen, and Juang 2004). An examination of the moderat- ing role of efficacy in the cocreation of values through CP is also important from the perspective of fostering continuous CP because it involves viewing it as a persistent, rather than short-term, behavior. More important, the limited focus of extant marketing studies on only the role of SE in CP is no longer appropriate because customers’ and employees’ participation in service coproduction necessitates interdependent relationships between parties. In relational contexts that require the effort of two parties for successful performance (e.g., professional services), both parties’ SE likely interacts dynamically with their other-efficacy (OE) beliefs—a person’s beliefs about his or her partner’s ability to perform particular behaviors— to influence their behaviors and attitudes (Bandura 1982; Lent and Lopez 2002). For example, when a client’s lack of confidence that her suggestions will be helpful to her finan- cial adviser (low SE) is compensated by her confidence in the financial adviser’s ability to handle her suggestions and identify suitable investments (high OE), she may still enjoy the participating process. Therefore, it is crucial to distin- guish SE and OE and examine both their separate and inter- acting effects on value cocreation through CP. Lent and Lopez’s (2002) conceptual framework of rela- tional efficacy beliefs is particularly relevant for studying 122 / Journal of Marketing, November 2012 CP in complex and high-credence services with dyadic interactions involving both customers and employees in close relationships (e.g., patient–doctor, client–financial adviser). This conceptual framework not only argues for the importance of considering a network of efficacy beliefs about the self (i.e., SE) and the other (i.e., OE) to illuminate interpersonal functioning in close relationships but also pro- poses exploring their synergistic effects, particularly in terms of the consequences arising from discrepancies between these efficacy beliefs. Understanding the effects of these discrepancies is important because they could vary depending on the role-specific (e.g., client vs. financial adviser) normative expectations of the parties. However, to the best of our knowledge, neither these proposed synergis- tic effects nor their variations due to expectations of the parties have been examined in any literature. In an attempt to address these research gaps, we adopt flow theory to propose and test a model of customers and service employees deriving enjoyment from CP conditional on their perceived efficacy about themselves and their part- ners in the context of financial services. “Customer partici- pation” refers to the extent to which customers expend time and effort to share information, provide suggestions, and get involved in decision making during the service production and delivery process (Auh et al. 2007; Bolton and Saxena- Iyer 2009; Chan, Yim, and Lam 2010). We select financial services as our research context because it offers opportuni- ties for cocreation of both extrinsic and intrinsic values through CP (Allen and McGoun 2000; Chiu et al. 2005; Payne, Storbacka, and Frow 2008). This study contributes to the literature, particularly in relation to recent studies on CP in services, in the following ways. First, it confirms the significant role of enjoyment (an intrinsic value), in addition to and separate from extrinsic values, in mediating CP and its consequential service out- comes. This endeavor helps fill a gap in value cocreation by complementing the recent work of Chan, Yim, and Lam (2010), which predominately focuses on examining utilitar- ian or extrinsic values cocreated through CP, with an expe- riential perspective (Etgar 2008). Creating an enjoyable participation experience for customers and employees is critical for value cocreation (Payne, Storbacka, and Frow 2008) because value is only created when an offering is experienced (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2004; Vargo and Lusch 2004). Understanding how CP drives participation enjoyment for both customers and employees also should help managers meet the experiential needs of both groups for effective CP. Second, this study represents a first attempt in the ser- vice literature to examine how customers’ and employees’ relational efficacy beliefs moderate the extent to which CP enhances their enjoyment and the consequential outcomes. The proposed model with a focus on the cocreation of intrinsic value of enjoyment and the moderating effects of efficacy is also theoretically grounded in the concept of flow that a good match between the level of challenges (e.g., those brought on by CP) and a consumer’s skills gen- erates an enjoyable state (Csikszentmihalyi 1990; Csik- szentmihalyi and LeFevre 1989). This application of flow theory also extends and enriches previous findings on the 1“Self-service technologies” refer to technological interfaces (e.g., automated teller machines, Internet banking) that enable cus- tomers to produce services without any service employee involve- ment (Meuter et al. 2005). boundary conditions of value cocreation of CP, from dispo- sitional or trait-based factors, such as cultural values (Chan, Yim, and Lam 2010), to the state- or task-based factor of efficacy to participate. Relational efficacy beliefs are more manageable and practical from a company’s perspective because they can be influenced more readily through com- pany actions, such as education and training (Parker 1998). Third, this is the first marketing study to distinguish efficacy about oneself (SE) and one’s partner (OE) and to consider them from the perspectives of both the customer and the service employee. This effort extends the examina- tion of efficacy in service participation from a single-party perspective to a multiparty, interdependent relationship per- spective. Moreover, examining the synergistic effects of SE and OE, particularly the consequences of congruence and incongruence between these efficacy beliefs, sheds new light on the unexplored but critical impacts of participants’ role expectations. This study not only considers the effects of high and low efficacy but also explores the differential impacts of efficacy discrepancies on customers and employ- ees based on their different normative role expectations. Finally, this study extends the application of flow theory in marketing by going beyond the limited context of online behaviors (e.g., Mathwick and Rigdon 2004; Novak, Hoff- Do Customers and Employees Enjoy Service Participation? / 123 man, and Yung 2000). This application corroborates previ- ous findings that customers can derive enjoyment from par- ticipating in financial services (e.g., Chiu et al. 2005; Payne, Storbacka, and Frow 2008) and also reinforces the key premise of flow theory that possession of efficacy on oneself and/or one’s partner is a necessary condition for achieving a flow experience or enjoyment through CP for both customers and service employees. Theoretical Background and Hypotheses Our conceptual model (Figure 1) depicts how CP enables customers and service employees to cocreate the intrinsic value of participation enjoyment, in addition to extrinsic values (i.e., relational value for both customers and employ- ees, economic value for customers, and job stress for employees), which then affects their satisfaction and behav- ioral outcomes. The cocreation of participation enjoyment is further conditional on their efficacy beliefs (SE and OE) of participation. The model is founded on the service-dominant logic (Vargo and Lusch 2004), which advocates a CP–value cocreation link and applies the concept of flow (Csikszent- mihalyi 1990; Nakamura and Csiszentmihalyi 2002) as an FIGURE 1 Conceptual Framework ! ! !"#$ !%&'()*+$ "#+',-,.#',(/$ 0/1(2)*/'#$ 0).3(2**$ "#+',-,.#',(/$ 0/1(2)*/'4$ !%&'()*+$ 5#',&6#-',(/#$ 0).3(2**$7(4$ 5#',&6#-',(/4! !%&'()*+$50#$ !%&'()*+$80#$ 0).3(2**$504$ 0).3(2**$804$ !%&'()*+$9*.%+-:#&*$ ;/'*/',(/#$ 0).3(2**$7(4$ "*+6(+)#/-*-$ !(/'+(3$<#+,#43*&$ $%&'()*+,*)-.(/**!01*! $%&'()*+,*)-.(/**! (+102340'3(20.!'*2%+*! $%&'()*+,*)-.(/**!1*25*+! 6/-*!(7!&*+839*&! 0).3(2**=$ ! 7(4$&'+*&&4$ ! 9*3#',(/#3$>#3%*4$ !%&'()*+=$ ! 0-(/(),-$>#3%*#$ ! 9*3#',(/#3$>#3%*#$ aResponses recorded from customers. bResponses recorded from service employees. cResponses recorded from supervisors. Notes: Solid arrows denote the hypothesized relationships examined in this study; dotted arrows denote relationships examined in prior research but not the focus of our study. overarching framework to conceptualize the relationships among CP, participation enjoyment, and efficacy beliefs. It also draws theoretical support from the conceptual model of relational efficacy beliefs (Bandura 1982; Lent and Lopez 2002) to justify the examination of OE, in addition to SE, and the synergistic effects of these efficacy beliefs on the cocreation of an enjoyable experience through CP. Economic and Relational Values Early research has argued that CP should deliver value to both customers and firms (Dabholkar 1990; Mills and Mor- ris 1986). However, findings on the effect of CP on customer satisfaction and loyalty are often mixed and inconsistent (e.g., Bendapudi and Leone 2003). Motivated by the value cocreation premise of the service-dominant logic, Chan, Yim, and Lam’s (2010) study represents a recent attempt to examine the effectiveness of CP in cocreating economic and relational values for both customers and employees. Their study contributes to the literature by establishing that CP drives performance outcomes (i.e., customer satisfac- tion, employee job satisfaction, and employee job perfor- mance) through the creation of these values. Specifically, CP offers customers economic values (i.e., higher quality, more customized services, and more control) and strength- ens the relational bond between customers and employees, but it also increases employees’ job stress and reduces their job satisfaction. Nevertheless, previous research on CP, including Chan, Yim, and Lam’s (2010) study, has predom- inantly focused on the cocreation of extrinsic values of an economic and relational nature. However, CP can also be intrinsically attractive to both customers and employees who can derive enjoyment simply from their experience of participation (Bateson 1985; Belk, Ger, and Askegaard 2000; Dabholkar 1990). Thus, the cocreation of intrinsic value or an enjoyable experience remains an important missing link in research on CP and value cocreation. In this study, we extend Chan, Yim, and Lam’s extant model, which proposes mediating roles of economic and relational values, by examining the additional but separate mediating role of participation enjoyment. Participation Enjoyment An experiential view of participation. The service- dominant logic (Vargo and Lusch 2004), as well as research supporting the notion of value cocreation, argues that value resides not in the object of consumption but in the experi- ence of consumption (Payne, Storbacka, and Frow 2008) and that value creation is embedded in personalized experi- ence (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2004). This proposition concurs with previous work on experiential consumption (e.g., Arnould and Thompson 2005; Hirschman and Hol- brook 1982; Holbrook and Hirschman 1982), which supple- ments and enriches the conventional information-processing approach that views customers as involved in a cognitive process of evaluating utilitarian benefits and costs by emphasizing emotional, contextual, symbolic, and nonutili- tarian aspects of experiences (Addis and Holbrook 2001). An experience can evoke value either through achieving its intended goal or by providing enjoyment (Babin, Darden, 124 / Journal of Marketing, November 2012 and Griffin 1994). In contrast with the information-processing perspective, which considers values attainable primarily through the utilitarian benefits provided, the experiential view adopts criteria for successful consumption that are essentially aesthetic in nature and hinge on appreciation of consumption for its own sake (Holbrook and Hirschman 1982). The prevailing focus on cocreation of extrinsic values in the CP literature is analogous to adopting the information- processing perspective to explain consumer behavior. Although some motives of CP can be attributed to extrinsic values, this perspective neglects an important part of the experience encountered by both customers and employees when they participate in the cocreation process (Etgar 2008; Payne, Storbacka, and Frow 2008)—namely, people who engage in activities for their own sake and can derive enjoy- ment simply from their experience of participation (Bateson 1985; Belk, Ger, and Askegaard 2000). A fun and enjoyable exchange experience could be created by customers’ partic- ipation (Dabholkar and Bagozzi 2002) as their role shifts from distanced spectators to coproducers of value (Deighton and Grayson 1995; Vargo and Lusch 2004). Etgar’s (2008) conceptual model of the consumer copro- duction process specifically identifies psychological values, such as a desire for fun, as a motivational force that encour- ages consumers to participate in coproduction. Such evi- dence suggests that “in addition to contributing to their own satisfaction by improving the quality of service delivered to them, some customers simply enjoy participating in service delivery” (Bitner et al. 1997, p. 198). Enjoyment and the flow experience. The enjoyment con- struct has been extensively studied in activities ranging from music, games, sports, and exercise to both offline and online human–computer interactions (Chan and Li 2010; Csikszentmihalyi 1975; Trevino and Webster 1992). It has also been used to capture the more experiential nature of an activity and is suggested to be intrinsically rewarding (Kimiecik and Harris 1996). We adapt the definition of enjoyment from previous literature to our context of CP by conceptualizing “customer (employee) participation enjoy- ment” as a psychological construct that measures a cus- tomer’s (an employee’s) level of positive affective experi- ence as a result of his or her (his or her customer’s) participation during the service process that reflects gener- alized feelings of pleasure, enjoyment, and fun (Babin, Dar- den, and Griffin 1994; McCarthy, Jones, and Clark-Carter 2008). The concept of “flow experience” (Csikszentmihalyi 1975), also taken up by experiential consumption research (Holbrook and Hirschman 1982), offers a fruitful frame- work for exploring the process of cocreating enjoyment through CP. Csikszentmihalyi’s (1975, p. 37) work focuses on examining the phenomenon of what he calls “flow expe- riences … so enjoyable that … the doing is the thing.” Other researchers have also explored these intrinsically motivated phenomena, including Deci (1975), who labels internal states with the rewarding properties of positive affect as “hedonistic positions,” and Calder and Staw (1975), who describe these states as “pleasurable” and “enjoyable.” We argue that an enjoyable experience matters in finan- cial services because flow or an enjoyable, intrinsically rewarding experience can occur even in “work” settings, in which extrinsic rewards can themselves justify participation (Nakamura and Csiszentmihalyi 2002). The finance litera- ture also offers the “investing-as-experience” metaphor to suggest that investing can be desirable in and of itself and that investors can derive pleasurable experiences from par- ticipating in investing (Allen and McGoun 2000). Previous marketing studies on financial services also show the importance of enjoyment in this context. For example, Chiu et al. (2005) suggest and find that customers perceive hedo- nic value or enjoyment from interacting with the bank staff. An intrinsically rewarding experience will also take on added significance in customers’ evaluations of financial services because performance in financial services (e.g., the true value of investment advice) is uncertain and assessable only over time (Sharma and Patterson 1999). Similarly, other financial services, such as securing a mortgage for a new home, can offer important and emotional encounters for customers because they involve experiential elements, such as in “making their dreams come true” (Payne, Stor- backa, and Frow 2008, p. 91). The process of sharing infor- mation and making suggestions by customers can also help employees gain a better understanding of customers’ requirements and expectations and make their job easier and the service more successful (Bitner et al. 1997), both of which should ultimately increase employees’ enjoyment of the service process. From a learning perspective, CP also could create enjoyment for both customers and employees because of the substantial time and effort invested and experiences learned. Studies on learning (Buenz and Merrill 1968) con- firm that people who exert a great deal of effort while learn- ing enjoy the learning process more than people who exert little effort. Moreover, CP enables a smoother and immedi- ate exchange of feedback between customers and employ- ees through the active sharing of information and comment- ing on each other’s views and suggestions, which could facilitate the flow experience of positive feelings and fun (Csikszentmihalyi 1990). Enjoyment and satisfaction. Evidence also supports the positive effect of participation enjoyment on customer satis- faction and employee job satisfaction. For example, in their studies of consumption emotions, Phillips and Baumgartner (2002) find a positive impact of consumption emotion (e.g., delight, happiness) on satisfaction evaluation. Other mar- keting researchers (e.g., Oliver 1980) also note that an enjoyable experience with a product or service is a neces- sary requirement for positive service evaluations and inten- tion to maintain a relationship with the provider. Moreover, studies on technology and virtual communities (e.g., Kou- faris 2002) suggest that enjoyment is a critical intrinsic benefit that strengthens users’ positive attitudes toward using computer technology. Shin (2006) finds a strong and positive impact of students’ experiences of enjoyment on their satisfaction with online courses. Chan and Li (2010) Do Customers and Employees Enjoy Service Participation? / 125 also conclude that people experiencing enjoyment from interacting with other users in a virtual community are more likely to be satisfied and contribute resources to that net- work. Similarly, employees will evaluate their job posi- tively if they find serving customers inherently enjoyable (Brown et al. 2002). Donavan, Brown, and Mowen (2004) note that a service worker who enjoys serving customers experiences greater job satisfaction. Therefore, we hypothe- size the following: H1a: Customer participation enjoyment mediates the impact of CP on customer satisfaction such that a higher level of CP leads to greater customer satisfaction through the creation of customer participation enjoyment. H1b: Employee participation enjoyment mediates the impact of CP on employee job satisfaction such that a higher level of CP leads to greater employee job satisfaction through the creation of employee participation enjoyment. Relational Efficacy Beliefs Previous research confirms that people tend to report the most positive experience when their perceived capabilities to act match the challenges or opportunities for action (Csikszentmihalyi and Lefevre 1989). Similarly, compe- tence is central to Deci’s (1975) concept of intrinsically motivated behavior in that positive affect is produced when challenges are conquered with the associated feeling of effi- cacy. Self-efficacy, or the “belief in one’s capabilities to organize and execute the courses of action required to pro- duce given attainments” (Bandura 1997, p. 3), operates as a cognitive mediator of action because people feel more com- fortable taking action if they believe they are capable of performing the task (Bandura 1977, 1982). As a domain- specific motivational belief, SE has been classified as a sit- uational variable, separate from more enduring personality traits (e.g., Dierdorff, Surface, and Brown 2010), that can be changed or influenced (Bandura 1977). In situations that demand engaging people in difficult tasks, SE can influence people’s choice of activities (Bandura 1977), serve as a robust performance predictor (e.g., Stajkovic and Luthans 1998), and even determine their attitudes and behaviors (e.g., Ellen, Bearden, and Sharma 1991). Nevertheless, focusing only on the role of SE in CP could be problematic because the relationship between cus- tomers and employees in service coproduction involves interdependent relationships, which means, according to social cognitive theory, that both parties’ perceived capabil- ities of their partners also matter (Bandura 1997, 2001). In marketing exchanges involving partners in close relation- ships, Bitner (1990) also shows that customers are more sat- isfied when they perceive the employees as possessing the ability and competence to solve problems. Examination of both SE and OE is also supported by the conceptual model of relational efficacy belief that Lent and Lopez (2002) pro- pose. This model shifts the focus from SE to a network of interpersonal efficacy beliefs in close social relationships, in which partners are interdependent and have mutual impacts (Berscheid, Gangestad, and Kulakowski 1984). It also underscores the presumption in social cognitive theory about the role of social influences on people’s efficacy beliefs and behaviors (Snyder and Stukas 1999) and notes the fruitfulness of examining these beliefs from both part- ners’ perspectives in dyadic, close relationship contexts. Recent studies in the sports context represent the fore- front on the roles of SE and OE in relational dyads (e.g., athlete–coach). For example, Jackson, Beauchamp, and Knapp (2007) find separate, significant effects of both SE and OE on relationship satisfaction and commitment. How- ever, no attention has been devoted to empirically examin- ing the potential impacts of congruent and incongruent lev- els of SE and OE on relational outcomes (Jackson, Knapp, and Beauchamp 2008; Lent and Lopez 2002) or the differ- ential effects of efficacy beliefs for partners with different roles or statuses (Jackson and Beauchamp 2010a). Lent and Lopez (2002) also introduce other efficacy beliefs, such as relation-inferred SE (i.e., a partner’s belief about how his or her efficacy is viewed by the other) or esti- mations of the other person’s SE. Because these conceptual- izations represent metaperceptions (or second-order expec- tations) (Jackson and Beauchamp 2010b; Snyder and Stukas 1999), we exclude them and focus instead on direct perceptions of efficacy beliefs (SE and OE), which we believe are more appropriate starting points for examining emerging issues related to efficacy beliefs and differential effects for partners who play different roles in service cocreation. Moderating Effects of SE on Customers and Employees According to flow theory (Csikszentmihalyi 1975, 1990) and research on intrinsically motivated behavior (Deci 1975), feelings of enjoyment emerge if a person perceives a high level of skill in handling the challenges encountered. We therefore anticipate that when the level of CP is high, customers (employees) should feel a higher level of enjoy- ment if they have a high level of perceived capabilities to participate (handle customers’ participation). First, high-SE people tend to engage more, exert more effort, and persist more to overcome task obstacles (Bandura 1997; Lent and Lopez 2002) because their high SE prompts them to set challenging goals (Maddux 1995), which in turn help them achieve more and further strengthen their abilities and effi- cacies (Locke and Latham 1990). This virtuous cycle of positive self-beliefs and persistent engagement enables high-SE people to enjoy their undertaking (Webb 2000). In contrast, people who are less efficacious settle for less and deny themselves the opportunity to fully enjoy their partici- pation (McKee, Simmers, and Licata 2006). Second, gaining a sense of control over the service process and the final outcome could contribute to enjoy- ment (Chan, Yim, and Lam 2010; Dabholkar 1990; Schnei- der and Bowen 1995) if people have confidence in their ability to use that control effectively (Schaubroeck and Merritt 1997). People who judge themselves as ineffica- cious will dwell on their personal deficiencies, magnify the severity of possible threats, worry about perils, and, in turn, experience high levels of cognitively generated distress (Bandura 1982). 126 / Journal of Marketing, November 2012 Third, customers actively learn about and customize their own service outputs through participation. Those who are more efficacious might feel more comfortable taking the role of “partial employee” and enjoy their participation experience (McKee, Simmers, and Licata 2006). Their high SE produces adaptive emotional states, so they can cope better with challenging or threatening situations induced by CP (Maddux 1995) and use their cognitive resources to search for solutions to problems rather than reflect on their inadequacies (Wood and Bandura 1989). Fourth, contact employees who possess high SE about handling customers’ participation likely create favorable service encounters (Gist and Mitchell 1992; Hartline and Ferrell 1996) by exerting more effort, being more persis- tent, and learning to cope with task-related obstacles (Ban- dura 1977; Gist 1987; Van Beuningen et al. 2009). There- fore, they should perceive more enjoyment from CP because they are more capable of both coping with demand- ing situations (e.g., increased input uncertainties, unex- pected requests) and effectively responding to the cus- tomers’ expressed needs by providing them immediate and valuable feedback during the service encounter (Hartline and Ferrell 1996). Taken together, customers (employees) with high SE are likely to derive more enjoyment from their (their cus- tomers’) participation because they feel more capable of handling challenges brought on by CP, sense more fun, and experience less distress. Thus, we expect the following: H2a: Customer SE of participation moderates the effect of CP on customer participation enjoyment such that high cus- tomer SE strengthens the positive effect of CP on cus- tomer participation enjoyment. H2b: Employee SE of participation moderates the effect of CP on employee participation enjoyment such that high employee SE strengthens the positive effect of CP on employee participation enjoyment. Synergistic Effects of SE and OE People in close relationships do not always rely exclusively on personal or proxy agency to achieve desired outcomes (Bray et al. 2001). If relationship partners work together to effect outcomes, and thus exercise both types of agency, they should seek out partners they view as efficacious and refrain from working with those they perceive as less com- petent (Lent and Lopez 2002). Therefore, judgments of both SE and OE should play important roles in shaping motiva- tions and experiences (Bray et al. 2001; Lent and Lopez 2002). Moderating effects of congruent levels of SE and OE. If successful performance requires partners to work together effectively, it is advantageous for both partners to possess favorable beliefs about their own and their partner’s compe- tence (i.e., “I can do my part, and my partner can do her part”; Lent and Lopez 2002). In financial services, success demands that clients and financial advisers exchange information and jointly make decisions about financial planning (Auh et al. 2007). Partners who are confident of their own and their partners’ capabilities to participate are more likely to persist in, derive more value from, and enjoy the collaboration. High levels of SE and OE also contribute to better task performance. Patients’ OE beliefs in their doctors’ capabili- ties supplement their own SE in helping them manage symptoms and overcome serious illness (Thompson et al. 1993). A combination of high SE and OE also promotes class attendance among novice exercisers (Bray et al. 2001). Christensen et al. (1996) further suggest that patients’ perceptions of their own efficacy increase their adherence to prescribed treatments more if they also have confidence in the expert judgment and actions of their providers. Although these studies do not directly test the joint effect of high levels of SE and OE on people’s feelings of enjoyment, we suggest that participants should find a positive task performance enjoyable. Many studies, includ- ing those on customers’ use of self-services (e.g., Dab- holkar and Bagozzi 2002), also have shown a strong rela- tionship between successful performance and self-reported enjoyment (Deci and Ryan 1985). In contrast, those who are convinced of inefficacy should feel uncomfortable and will not enjoy the task of service coproduction (Bandura 1982). Therefore: H3a: Customer participation has (i) a positive effect on cus- tomer participation enjoyment when customers have high levels of customer SE and customer OE and (ii) a nega- tive effect on customer participation enjoyment when they have low levels of customer SE and customer OE. H3b: Customer participation has (i) a positive effect on employee participation enjoyment when employees have high levels of employee SE and employee OE and (ii) a negative effect on employee participation enjoyment when they have low levels of employee SE and employee OE. Moderating effects of incongruent levels of SE and OE. Two questions emerge in a setting of incongruent levels of SE and OE. First, do high SE and low OE produce the same results as low SE and high OE, for either customers or employees? Second, are the moderating effects of incongru- ent levels of SE and OE the same for customers and employees? We refer to role expectancy validation and vio- lation to address these questions. Any interaction between parties contains learned and consistent behavior patterns (e.g., a financial service involves clients and financial advisers), such that each par- ticipant has a particular role and certain expectations of his or her partner’s role (Broderick 1999; Solomon et al. 1985). Accurate mutual comprehension of role expectations is a prerequisite for a satisfying interaction experience because knowledge of doing the right thing and of partners playing their expected roles (i.e., role expectancy validation) creates successful interactions with others and satisfaction with performance (Solomon et al. 1985). Inconsistency with role expectations (i.e., role expectancy violation)—namely, when a party steps out of his or her role or the parties do not share common role definitions—leads to negative dyadic experience and performance (Bartholow et al. 2001; Solomon et al. 1985). For example, a doctor may bristle at a patient who tries to provide a self-diagnosis (Schneider 1980). Such expectancy violations of one partner can cause the other partner to experience greater affective arousal Do Customers and Employees Enjoy Service Participation? / 127 (Bartholow et al. 2001) and develop unfavorable evalua- tions (Kernahan, Bartholow, and Bettencourt 2000) because unexpectedness can be a source of intense negative emo- tions and physiological reactions (Clore, Schwarz, and Con- way 1994). Role expectancy violations also reduce mindlessness and mandate increased cognitive activity to form an evalua- tion (Bargh and Thein 1985; Bartholow et al. 2001) because they create more situational uncertainty (Wyer, Sherman, and Stroessner 2000). The need to expend effort to predict a partner’s uncertain behavior decreases the time available for task activities (Bartholow et al. 2001; Strangor and McMillan 1992). Thus, interacting with expectancy-violating partners taxes people’s working memory and attentional resources, which can result in performance impairments in cooperative tasks (Mendes et al. 2007). In financial services, both clients and financial advisers likely hold conventional role expectations of themselves and their partners. Clients expect financial advisers to act as knowledgeable, competent, and experienced service providers, while they take the default role of a service recip- ient (McClure 2003). Therefore, clients should attend closely to the efficacy of their financial advisers. Incongru- ent levels among clients, such as low customer SE and high customer OE, then might validate their role expectations for both themselves and their partners. These incongruent but complementary appraisals of SE and OE could still function well because strong expectations of the efficacy of a partner may help compensate for lower SE (Lent and Lopez 2002). For example, clients may have satisfying therapy experi- ences, even if they feel inefficacious about their own abili- ties, because they are optimistic about the therapist’s com- petence (Lent and Lopez 2002). Bray et al. (2001) also suggest that high OE toward instructors helps people over- come their own inefficacy and successfully perform strenu- ous aerobic workouts. Thus, customers with low SE should still derive enjoyment from CP, as long as they have high OE beliefs about the service employees. H4: Customer participation has a positive effect on customer participation enjoyment when customers have low cus- tomer SE and high customer OE. Yet clients likely consider high customer SE and low customer OE a role expectancy violation. Clients’ high cus- tomer SE may motivate them to exert more effort, but they may attain less enjoyment from their participation when they perceive financial advisers as lacking the capability to cocreate. A “typical” financial adviser seemingly should be knowledgeable about and competent in coproducing the services (McClure 2003). The cognitive dissonance created by a role expectancy violation could lead to frustration or anger (Festinger 1957). High customer SE and low cus- tomer OE also might create inequity perceptions among clients because these conditions violate the norm of reci- procity in social exchanges (Blau 1964). Therefore, they should impair the effect of CP on customer participation enjoyment. H5: Customer participation has a negative effect on customer participation enjoyment when customers have high cus- tomer SE and low customer OE. Role expectancy validation/violation is equally applica- ble to employees, though with an opposite effect. That is, low SE and high OE among employees should attenuate the effect of CP on their enjoyment; employees may not enjoy CP at all or even derive negative enjoyment from it. Employees’ inefficacy disconfirms their roles as expert ser- vice providers and creates inconsistency in their beliefs about expected and actual role performance, which may lead to frustration and depression (Martinko and Gardner 1982), especially if they perceive high OE among cus- tomers whose traditional role is to receive services. Such discrepancies may drive employees to adopt a negative self- view because their sense of being an expert is threatened by the comparison with their customers (Festinger 1954). This notion of social comparison is consistent with Bonito’s (2002) argument that people respond negatively to others’ successes as a result of interpersonal comparison. Thus, their enjoyment will be hampered throughout the service process. Employees’ low SE is also exposed when interact- ing with customers who actively participate in the service process, leading to more negative outcomes (e.g., frustra- tion, low self-esteem). Discrepancies between SE and OE may create negative affect and relationship termination because those with more confidence in their partners than in themselves expect their partners to leave (Jackson, Knapp, and Beauchamp 2008). Conversely, if employees perceive high SE and low OE among customers, they can still attain enjoyment from CP. They sense more consonant beliefs about their roles because they can rationalize the low efficacy of customers according to their expected role as service recipients. Kerr and Brunn (1983) find that when other people’s (maximum) output is limited by their innate inability (e.g., women are stereotypically considered weaker than men on effort exer- tion tasks), participants do not mind taking up others’ reduced efforts. Thus, any type of participation by cus- tomers to facilitate value cocreation is an “extra bonus” for employees. Furthermore, the act of social comparison with inefficacious customers may help employees feel better about their coproduction abilities and thus enjoy the process more (Bonito 2002). In our study context, employees with high SE should enjoy associating with inefficacious cus- tomers who help them feel competent in comparison and put themselves in situations that increase opportunities to display their competence (Bandura 1992; Maddux 1995). Thus, we posit the following: H6: Customer participation has a negative effect on employee participation enjoyment when employees have low employee SE and high employee OE. H7: Customer participation has a positive effect on employee participation enjoyment when employees have high employee SE and low employee OE. Satisfaction Evaluations and Behavioral Outcomes Finally, we consider the contribution of CP, through partici- pation enjoyment, to two ultimate performance outcomes: customers’ repurchase intention and employees’ job perfor- mance. Repurchase intention is the most widely used indi- 128 / Journal of Marketing, November 2012 cator of customer loyalty in recent marketing research (e.g., Castano et al. 2008; Chandon, Morwitz, and Reinartz 2005; Morgan and Rego 2006; Wagner, Hennig-Thurau, and Rudolph 2009). In parallel, the importance of employee job performance has dominated research in the field of organi- zational behavior (e.g., Janssen and Van Yperen 2004). In line with previous research, we expect customer satisfaction and employee job satisfaction to exert a positive impact on customers’ future intention to use the firm’s services and employees’ job performance, respectively (Chan, Yim, and Lam 2010; Cronin and Taylor 1992; Oliver 1980; Oliver and Swan 1989). Thus: H8: Customer satisfaction has a positive effect on customer repurchase intention. H9: Employee job satisfaction has a positive effect on employee job performance. Methodology Financial services provide an appropriate context for our study because an intrinsically rewarding experience matters in these services (Allen and McGoun 2000; Payne, Stor- backa, and Frow 2008; Sharma and Patterson 1999). These services also require teamwork by both clients and financial advisers (Auh et al. 2007; Chan, Yim, and Lam 2010). A lack of confidence or efficacy in either party likely limits the effectiveness of their coproduction of successful service outcomes (Van Beuningen et al. 2009). These clients and financial advisers engage in close relationships and invest considerable time, effort, and personal resources in their partnerships, such that the relational beliefs we examine are particularly relevant (Lent and Lopez 2002). Sample and Sampling Procedures The data for this study come from 223 matched pairs of customers of financial services and service employees of a large multinational bank in Hong Kong. The employee respondents worked in various divisions, including loans (22%), insurance (17%), financial planning (29%), and asset/ fund management (32%). Selected employees were asked to fill out one “employee” questionnaire for each of their “active” customers with whom they had business transactions during the data collection period.2 This ques- tionnaire included measures of employee SE and OE, par- ticipation enjoyment, job stress and relational value arising from CP, and job satisfaction. Of the 376 selected employ- ees, 246 returned usable questionnaires for at least one active customer (65% response rate). We then sent a cus- tomer questionnaire to the active customers of each of the 246 employee respondents. This questionnaire included measures of CP, customer SE and OE, participation enjoy- ment, economic and relational values cocreated through CP, satisfaction, and repurchase intention. Of the 1869 customer respondents, 953 returned usable questionnaires (51% 2We excluded customers with less than one year’s tenure with the bank because they may not have had sufficient interactions with the selected employees; each selected employee served 5–11 active customers during the survey period. response rate). We then matched corresponding usable questionnaires from customer and employee respondents to form customer–employee dyads.3 Finally, we retained only unique customer–employee dyads by randomly selecting only one dyad per employee. As a result, we used 223 unique customer–employee dyads in our data analysis. Both the customer and employee surveys are designed to assess perceptions of one-to-one corresponding service experi- ences between each pair of employee and customer accu- mulated over their multiple interactions, rather than after a single transaction. This approach is consistent with the ser- vice-dominant logic (Vargo and Lusch 2004), which states that in value cocreation, customers and service providers must engage in relational exchanges, often for extended periods, beyond the transaction. To assess nonresponse bias, we compared the data from customer and employee respondents with company data pertaining to the population of similar customers and employees, respectively, and found no significant differ- ences in terms of age, gender, and tenure. The employee (customer) respondents had a mean age of 33.6 (37.2) years and mean tenure of 5.1 (3.8) years, and 64% (52%) were women. We also separately collected employees’ job per- formance ratings by their immediate supervisors from the company record. These ratings were made at approximately the same time we conducted the employee survey. Measure Operationalization The original questionnaire was prepared in English and trans- lated into Chinese by means of standard back-translation methods (Brislin 1980). We pretested the questionnaire with 30 employees and 20 customers and asked them to com- ment on any items they found ambiguous or difficult to understand; no major changes to the items were required. The Appendix provides the scales for measuring the model constructs and measurement reliability and validity. In terms of discriminant validity, we first ran chi-square differ- ence tests for all constructs in pairs to test whether the restricted model (correlation fixed at 1) was significantly worse than the model with correlation estimated freely. All chi-square differences were significant. Following Fornell and Larcker’s (1981) criterion, we then examined whether the shared variances between all possible pairs of constructs were lower than the average variance extracted (AVE) for the individual constructs. For each construct, the AVE was higher than its highest shared variance with other con- structs, in support of discriminant validity. All items, unless otherwise indicated, use a five-point Likert scale (1 = “strongly disagree,” and 5 = “strongly agree”). The items mostly come from previous research, with minor wording modifications to fit our study context. Table 1 lists the descriptive statistics of the key constructs. Following Auh et al. (2007) and Chan, Yim, and Lam (2010), we adopted a self-reported behavioral approach to capture customers’ level of participation in the service Do Customers and Employees Enjoy Service Participation? / 129 process. We measured the extent to which a customer invests time and effort to share information, provide sug- gestions, and get involved in decision making during the service production and delivery process. We adapted the customers’ SE scale from Riggs et al.’s (1994) personal efficacy belief scale, with four items that measured cus- tomers’ beliefs in their ability and confidence to perform the participation task. The same SE scale measured the employ- ees’ beliefs in their ability and confidence to respond to cus- tomers’ participation. For the OE measurement, we used the same four items but amended them to refer to “rate this cus- tomer” (for employee OE) and “rate this employee” (for customer OE). The customer (employee) participation enjoyment items measured customers’ (employees’) level of positive affective experience with their own (their cus- tomers’) participation that reflects feelings such as enjoy- ment and fun (Csikszentmihalyi 1990; Kimiecik and Harris 1996; Koufaris 2002). We adapted measures for customers’ and employees’ economic and relational values from Chan, Yim, and Lam (2010). We measured customer economic value with items that capture its main characteristics of bet- ter service quality, customized services, and more control. We measured customer and employee relational value with items that represent a better relationship, better connection, and relational approval. We assessed employee job stress with items covering key job stressors of nervousness, role conflict, and increased problems. Last, for measures of cus- tomer satisfaction, repurchase intention, employee job satis- faction, and job performance, we adopted items from previ- ous literature with minor modifications to fit our context (e.g., Chan, Yim, and Lam 2010; Hartline and Ferrell 1996). We included age, gender, organizational tenure of cus- tomers and employees, and the types of services involved as control variables. Previous experiences, as reflected by age and job tenure, are the most influential efficacy cues. Schwoerer and May (1996) argue that older employees pos- sess more stable SE beliefs than younger employees for shaping their work behavior because their cumulative, direct work and life experiences provide a basis for these beliefs. Moreover, tenure has been increasingly recognized as rele- vant for understanding work outcomes (Bedeian, Farris, and Kacmar 1992). In terms of gender, men report higher levels of enjoyment and higher perceptions of their competence than women (Carroll and Loumidis 2001). Finally, we also controlled for the type of services because different services might require different levels of expertise from the partici- pants and affect their perceived enjoyment differently. Results Measurement Model Tests Using confirmatory factor analysis with LISREL 8 (Jöreskog and Sörbom 1993), we assessed the validity of the 15-factor constructs of CP, customer SE and OE, employee SE and OE, customer and employee participation enjoyment, customer economic value, employee job stress, customer and employee relational value, customer satisfac- tion, employee job satisfaction, customer repurchase inten- tion, and employee job performance. The 15-factor model 3For example, the case of an employee returning questionnaires on four of his or her active customers and three of these customers returning questionnaires on this employee provides three matched pairs of questionnaires. 130 / Journal of Marketing, November 2012 TA BL E 1 De sc rip tiv e St at is tic s M SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1. CP 3. 41 .7 9 (.9 1) 2. Cu sto m er S E 3. 54 .8 2 .1 4 (.9 2) 3. Cu sto m er O E 3. 38 .7 8 .1 0 –. 12 (.9 0) 4. Em plo ye e SE 3. 42 .7 7 .1 4 .0 8 .0 7 (.9 0) 5. Em plo ye e OE 3. 33 .7 2 .0 9 .1 0 .0 9 –. 11 (.8 8) 6. Cu sto m er e co no m ic va lue 3. 61 .7 7 .3 7 .1 2 .1 0 .0 4 .0 4 (.9 0) 7. Em plo ye e job s tre ss 3. 30 .7 2 .3 1 .0 8 .0 8 .1 4 .1 0 .2 2 (.9 1) 8. Cu sto m er re lat ion al va lue 3. 46 .7 8 .4 0 .1 3 .0 9 .0 5 .0 4 .4 1 .2 9 (.8 9) 9. Em plo ye e re lat ion al va lue 3. 24 .7 7 .2 8 .0 9 .0 5 .11 .1 0 .1 2 .1 7 .2 0 (.9 4) 10 . Cu sto m er p ar tic ipa tio n en joy m en t 3. 80 .7 6 .3 3 .2 4 .1 8 .2 2 .1 5 .2 6 –. 18 .2 8 .2 0 (.9 0) 11 . Em plo ye e pa rti cip at ion e njo ym en t 3. 56 .8 4 .3 5 .2 2 .1 8 .2 0 .1 4 .2 0 –. 25 .2 0 .2 6 .4 0 (.9 0) 12 . Cu sto m er s at isf ac tio n 3. 76 .7 8 .2 8 .1 8 .1 6 .1 5 .1 4 .3 2 .2 1 .3 6 .1 6 .5 5 .4 2 (.9 1) 13 . Em plo ye e job s at isf ac tio n 3. 48 .8 0 .3 0 .1 7 .1 4 .1 6 .1 4 .1 0 –. 36 .0 8 .2 0 .4 4 .5 0 .4 4 (.8 8) 14 . Cu sto m er re pu rc ha se in te nt ion a 3. 47 .7 4 .3 6 .2 8 .3 4 .3 2 .4 3 .3 8 .0 9 .3 2 .2 3 .4 7 .4 2 .5 7 .4 2 — 15 . Em plo ye e job p er fo rm an ce a 3. 52 .9 7 .3 2 .2 2 .3 0 .3 1 .2 1 .1 2 –. 05 .1 4 .1 6 .2 1 .2 4 .5 4 .5 3 .3 1 — a S ing le- ite m m ea su re . No te s: n = 22 3. O ff- dia go na l n um be rs a re co rre lat ion s b et we en co ns tru cts . C or re lat ion s g re at er th an .1 4 ar e sig nif ica nt a t p < .0 5. C or re lat ion s g re at er th an .2 3 ar e sig nif ica nt a t p < .0 1. N um be rs in pa re nt he se s ar e co ef fic ien t a lph as . yielded a goodness-of-fit index of .95, confirmatory fit index of .94, and root mean square error of approximation of .06 (2(1, 119) = 2,751). The factor loading of each item on its corresponding construct was significant at the .001 level, in support of convergent validity (Anderson and Gerbing 1988). We also tested the fit statistics of 1- to 14-factor models, all of which had significantly worse fit (p < .01) than the 15-factor model. These tests support a factor struc- ture that specifies the unidimensionality of the measures. Hypotheses Testing To test H1a and H1b on the mediating role of participation enjoyment (and validate the mediating effects of economic and relational values found in Chan, Yim, and Lam’s [2010] study), we use the mediation test procedures that Baron and Kenny (1986) recommend.4 The results in Table 2, Panel A, Do Customers and Employees Enjoy Service Participation? / 131 show that CP has a significantly positive effect on satisfac- tion, participation enjoyment, economic value, and rela- tional value for customers. Customer participation enjoy- ment and economic and relational values also are significantly related to customer satisfaction. When CP and the three cocreated values for customers appear as predic- tors of customer satisfaction, the effect of CP becomes non- significant ( = .07, n.s.), while the effects of the three cocreated values remain significant (participation enjoyment = .35, p < .01; economic value = .38, p < .01; relational value = .41, p < .01). These results not only validate the mediating effects of economic and relational values found in Chan, Yim, and Lam (2010) but also suggest the additional sig- nificant mediating role of customer participation enjoyment in the relationship between CP and customer satisfaction, in support of H1a. As Table 2, Panel B, shows, similar results for the significant mediating role of employee participation enjoyment, along with the mediating effects of employee job stress and relational value, in linking CP to employee TABLE 2 Mediation Tests of Customer and Employee Participation Enjoyment A: Customer Participation Enjoyment Customer Customer Customer Customer Customer Participation Economic Relational Customer Variables Satisfaction Satisfaction Enjoyment Value Value Satisfaction Control Variables Customer age –.05 –.05 –.03 –.03 –.03 –.05 Employee age –.03 –.05 –.02 –.04 –.03 –.02 Customer organizational tenure .08 .05 .05 .05 .05 .04 Employee organizational tenure .02 .06 .05 .05 .06 .03 Customer gender –.02 –.04 –.02 –.03 –.02 –.03 Employee gender –.04 –.02 –.05 –.04 –.04 –.04 Type of services –.05 –.06 –.03 –.03 –.03 –.04 Independent Variables CP .28** .32** .37** .40** .07 Customer participation enjoyment .31** .35** Customer economic value .36** .38** Customer relational value .38** .41** Total R2 .11** .33** .13** .15** .15** .34** B: Employee Participation Enjoyment Employee Employee Employee Employee Employee Job Job Participation Employee Relational Job Variables Satisfaction Satisfaction Enjoyment Job Stress Value Satisfaction Control Variables Customer age –.05 –.04 –.03 –.03 –.03 –.05 Employee age –.03 –.04 –.03 –.04 –.03 –.03 Customer organizational tenure .06 .07 .05 .05 .05 .03 Employee organizational tenure .03 .04 .05 .05 .04 .04 Customer gender –.02 –.03 –.02 –.04 –.03 –.03 Employee gender –.03 –.03 –.04 –.05 –.05 –.05 Type of services –.06 –.05 –.03 –.04 –.03 –.04 Independent Variables CP .30** .33** .31** .28** .07 Employee participation enjoyment .41** .44** Employee job stress –.34** –.31** Employee relational value .19** .19** Total R2 .12** .31* .13** .12** .11** .31** *p < .05 (two-tailed test). **p < .01 (two-tailed test). 4We used average estimates for the constructs in all regression analyses. job satisfaction emerge, in suppoºrt of H1b. Thus, we con- firm that participation enjoyment is a significant value cocreated through CP in financial services, in addition to and separate from economic and relational values. Taken together, these results confirm a key premise of the service- dominant logic that value cocreation matters and also extend it to the case of employees. To test the moderating effects of SE on participation enjoyment (H2a and H2b), we employ moderated regression (see Table 3). We enter the control variables in Step 1, main effects in Step 2, and two-way interaction terms in Step 3. To test the joint moderating effects of SE and OE (H3–H7), we enter the three-way interaction terms in Step 4. In H2a, we predict that customer SE moderates the relationship between CP and customer participation enjoyment; Table 3 shows that the two-way interaction (CP × customer SE) is significant ( = .33, p < .01). Specifically, for the group of customers scoring high on SE, we find a strong positive relationship between CP and customer participation enjoy- ment, but no such positive relationship emerges when cus- tomers’ SE is low, in support of H2a. In H2b, we also predict that employee SE moderates the relationship between CP and employee participation enjoy- ment; Table 3 shows that the two-way interaction term of CP × employee SE is significant (β = .36, p < .01), in sup- port of H2b. In particular, when employees have high SE, we find a strong positive relationship between CP and employee participation enjoyment. Among employees with 132 / Journal of Marketing, November 2012 low SE, no relationship emerges between CP and employee participation enjoyment. Regarding the moderating effects of congruent levels of customer SE and OE and employee SE and OE, Table 3 shows that the hypothesized three-way interactions are sig- nificant (customer:  = .40, p < .01; employee:  = –.42, p < .01). Following Aiken and West (1991), we used unstan- dardized regression coefficients to plot the relationship between CP and customer participation enjoyment at low levels (one standard deviation below the mean) and high levels (one standard deviation above the mean) of customer SE, customer OE, employee SE, and employee OE. As the left-hand side of Figure 2, Panel A, shows, CP is positively related to customer participation enjoyment when both cus- tomer SE and customer OE are high; however, it is nega- tively related to customer participation enjoyment when both customer SE and customer OE are low (right-hand side). These results support H3a. Figure 2, Panel B, also presents the results of the three-way interaction among CP, employee SE, and employee OE on employee participation enjoyment. In support of H3b, CP is positively related to employee par- ticipation enjoyment when both employee SE and employee OE are high (left-hand side) but negatively related when both employee SE and employee OE are low (right-hand side). We also hypothesize about the moderating effects of incongruent customer SE and OE and employee SE and OE. As the left-hand side of Figure 2, Panel A, reveals, CP is positively related to customer participation enjoyment TABLE 3 Results of Moderating Tests of SE and OE on Participation Enjoyment Customer Participation Employee Participation Enjoyment Enjoyment Step 1: Control Variables Customer age –.02 –.02 –.02 –.02 –.03 –.04 –.01 –.04 Employee age –.03 –.03 –.03 –.03 –.03 –.03 –.03 –.04 Customer organizational tenure .05 .05 .05 .05 .05 .04 .06 .05 Employee organizational tenure .05 .04 .05 .05 .05 .05 .05 .05 Customer gender –.05 –.05 –.05 –.05 –.04 –.04 –.04 –.03 Employee gender –.02 –.03 –.02 –.02 –.02 –.02 –.02 –.02 Type of services –.03 –.03 –.03 –.03 –.03 –.04 –.05 –.04 Step 2: Independent Variables CP .32** .24** .21** .18** .33** .19** .20** .18** Customer SE .11 .08 .08 Customer OE .08 .05 Employee SE .08 .08 .07 Employee OE .08 .04 Step 3: Two-Way Interaction Terms CP ¥ customer SE (H2a) .33** .31** .20* CP ¥ customer OE .30** .29** Customer SE ¥ customer OE –.20** –.20** CP ¥ employee SE (H2b) .36** .31** .28** CP ¥ employee OE .08 .07 Employee SE ¥ employee OE .25** .24** Step 4: Three-Way Interaction Terms CP ¥ customer SE ¥ customer OE (H3a, H4, H5) .40** CP ¥ employee SE ¥ employee OE (H3b, H6, H7) –.42** Total R2 .13 .18 .23 .28 .13 .17 .22 .26 R2 at last step .05** .05** .05** .04** .05** .04** *p < .05 (two-tailed test). **p < .01 (two-tailed test). when customers have low customer SE and high customer OE, in support of H4. However, CP has no effect on cus- tomer participation enjoyment (simple slope: b = .08, t = .98, p > .10) when customers have high customer SE and low customer OE (right-hand side). This finding implies that incongruence only attenuates the effect of CP, to the point that customers derive no enjoyment from their partic- ipation in the service process. We thus cannot confirm H5; it might be that high customer SE motivated customers to exert more effort in their participation and evoked higher enjoyment, which offset the negative effect on enjoyment due to role expectancy violation of the employees. More- over, CP negatively affects employee participation enjoy- ment when employees have low employee SE and high employee OE (left-hand side of Figure 2, Panel B), but this effect is not significant (simple slope: b = –.09, t = 1.04, p > Do Customers and Employees Enjoy Service Participation? / 133 .10). Because this incongruence level of efficacy beliefs does not generate negative enjoyment for employees, we cannot confirm H6. The negative effect of role expectancy violation (low employee SE and high employee OE) might not be as strong as we expected; it only attenuates the posi- tive effect of CP on employee participation enjoyment to a negative, but not significant, level. Consistent with H7, CP is positively related to employee participation enjoyment when employees have high employee SE and low employee OE (right-hand side of Figure 2, Panel B). Finally, regres- sion results confirm that customer satisfaction (H8) and employee job satisfaction (H9) positively affect customer repurchase intention (β = .50, p < .01) and employee job performance (β = .48, p < .01), respectively.5 B: Employee Participation Enjoyment ! Low CP High CP High Customer OE.5 .4 .3 .2 .1 0 –.1 –.2 –.3 –.4 –.5C us to m er P ar tic ip at io n En jo ym en t FIGURE 2 Three-Way Interactions A: Customer Participation Enjoyment Low customer SE High customer SE !! ! Low CP High CP Low Customer OE.5 .4 .3 .2 .1 0 –.1 –.2 –.3 –.4 –.5C us to m er P ar tic ip at io n En jo ym en t Low customer SE High customer SE !! ! Low CP High CP High Employee OE.5 .4 .3 .2 .1 0 –.1 –.2 –.3 –.4 –.5 Em pl oy ee P ar tic ip at io n En jo ym en t Low employee SE High employee SE !! ! Low CP High CP Low Employee OE.5 .4 .3 .2 .1 0 –.1 –.2 –.3 –.4 –.5 Em pl oy ee P ar tic ip at io n En jo ym en t Low employee SE High employee SE !! 5We do not present these regression results in a separate table because of space consideration. Discussion The prevailing focus of CP research on the cocreation of utilitarian values and the sole impact of SE fails to recog- nize other benefits associated with the psychological experience and the interplay of efficacy beliefs between customers and employees, and thus it precludes the explo- ration of strategies designed to manage and/or influence customers’ and employees’ efficacy beliefs for the effective cocreation of hedonic or intrinsic values through CP. This study aims to complement extant research by ascertaining the effectiveness of CP for both customers and service employees from an experiential perspective. It applies the concept of flow and adopts the theoretical framework of relational efficacy beliefs to guide the development of hypotheses to test the cocreation of enjoyment for customers and employees through CP conditional on their separate and joint efficacies of participation. In doing so, this study fur- ther contributes to both the CP and efficacy literature streams by examining the synergistic effects of SE and OE, including congruence and incongruence levels of these effi- cacy beliefs, in close relationships (Lent and Lopez 2002). The finding that these relational efficacy beliefs, as bound- ary conditions, separately and jointly affect the cocreation of enjoyment for both customers and employees is instru- mental for identifying strategies to enhance the benefits of CP. We find that a high level of SE helps create a positive relationship between CP and participation enjoyment for customers and employees, whereas such a positive relation- ship does not emerge when SE is low. This moderating effect of SE on the relationship between CP and participa- tion enjoyment is arguably more significant than its role as an antecedent to CP, because enjoyment of participation provides important cocreated values that affect both cus- tomer and employee satisfaction. Customers and employees with more confidence in their capabilities to participate in the service cocreation process perceive more value from CP, feel more comfortable, and are more willing to put more effort into overcoming difficulties or obstacles encountered than those with low SE. Customers’ OE beliefs also explain unique variance in their participation enjoyment, beyond that explained by their SE alone. Clients who believe that their financial advisers have a high level of efficacy to respond to their participation enjoy the service process more. Clients’ per- ceived efficacy of their financial advisers also complements their own SE in determining whether they derive enjoyment from their participation, which highlights the importance of assessing customers’ OE beliefs when studying CP. Customers and employees derive the most (least) enjoy- ment from CP when both partners possess congruent high (low) levels of SE and OE. Because the cocreation of value is a universal, key benefit of CP (Chan, Yim, and Lam 2010), our results confirm expectations that the maximum value of CP arises only if both customers and employees have confidence in themselves and their partners and can work together in service production and delivery. If cus- tomers and employees instead are inefficacious and feel the same way about their partners, they probably should not 134 / Journal of Marketing, November 2012 engage in participation; they are not likely to enjoy and may even be dissatisfied with their experience. Incongruent appraisals of SE and OE, however, can work in some circumstances. Incongruent but complemen- tary efficacy beliefs, such as when customers perceive low SE and high OE or employees perceive high SE and low OE, can enable both partners to derive enjoyment from CP. Incongruent levels of SE and OE also induce asymmetric effects when the dyad members (e.g., client–financial adviser) perform different tasks and assume different roles. If customers and employees still enjoy CP because one part- ner’s high efficacy compensates for the other partner’s low efficacy, both parties’ perceptions of capabilities should val- idate, rather than violate, their expectations of role scripts. In the context of financial services, clients expect profes- sional guidance and advice from their financial advisers, so their perceptions of their partner’s efficacy are critical for determining their participation enjoyment. In contrast, financial advisers should have more expertise in providing financial services and be less reliant on their clients to sus- tain their participation enjoyment. Managerial Implications Confirming the significant role of enjoyment in CP and the importance of managing both customers’ and employees’ SE and OE offers new opportunities to enhance value cocreation by engaging customers and employees in service coproduction. Our findings suggest several implications for service companies to maximize the cocreation of values through CP. Adopt a holistic view of value cocreation through CP. Creating a positive experience in participation is especially important because it affects customer satisfaction and other consequential outcomes (Payne, Storbacka, and Frow 2008; Vargo and Lusch 2004); however, relying on the cocreation of utilitarian values alone is unlikely to work satisfactorily (e.g., Etgar 2008). Managers who want to successfully involve customers in participation should also explore opportunities for creating experiential or hedonic values and ascertain the relative importance of various motiva- tional drivers that contribute to customer satisfaction as a result of their participation in the service process. Help customers cultivate enjoyable experience from their participation. Customer participation could be viewed as a new task for both customers and employees, in which enjoyment could be cultivated by providing training or edu- cation about their new roles and responsibilities (Jones 1986). Recruiting employees who are more customer ori- ented would help because they are more likely to show a commitment to responding to customers’ participation for its own sake (Brown et al. 2002). However, recruiting for attitude may not be sufficient unless training for skills is implemented in parallel to enhance employees’ skills in handling customers’ participation. Foster customers’ (and employees’) SE of participation. Both customers’ and employees’ SE of participation are domain-specific, task-based motivational beliefs rather than personality traits (e.g., Dierdorff, Surface, and Brown 2010); therefore, they can be changed or influenced. In line with the fields of counseling and psychotherapy, founded on the premise of influencing clients’ efficacy beliefs, ser- vice firms wanting to improve the effectiveness of CP could formulate strategies to either add to customers’ and employ- ees’ perceived competence and capabilities to participate or design the service process in such a way that customers and employees are still able to participate in cocreation effi- ciently and effectively even without congruent high levels of efficacy (Bandura 1977; Beck 1967; Strecher et al. 1986). Helping customers recognize the success of their partici- pation could be an effective strategy because personal per- formance accomplishments are influential in determining and modifying people’s SE beliefs (Bandura 1997; Lent and Lopez 2002). Firms could hold regular investment seminars to provide opportunities for novice customers to learn from experienced investors to gradually take on a value cocreator role. The probability of successful CP also increases when participation is manageable and easy and appropriate cus- tomer education and training is available in the form of detailed, customer-friendly instructions or aids (McKee, Simmers, and Licata 2006). Employees could also help bol- ster customers’ SE through positive verbal persuasion (e.g., “You did a great job”) because self-appraisals often form in response to the evaluative reactions of significant others, particularly in more complex, interpersonal contexts in which social cues are salient indicators of performance (Bandura 1982; Lent and Lopez 2002). Similar methods could be used to bolster employees’ SE. First, clear communication and accurate descriptions of the tasks necessary to coproduce services can help employ- ees assess complex demands, properly regulate their effort, and reduce faulty assessments of their efficacy (Stajkovic and Luthans 1998). Second, praise and positive reinforce- ment from supervisors could be highly credible and effec- tive for enhancing employees’ perceptions of their task capability (Gist 1987). Third, firms should work to build an efficacious workforce through selection and training, goal setting, and on-the-job coaching (Bandura 1997; Jex and Bliese 1999). Enhance customers’ OE beliefs. Customers derive less enjoyment from working with employees they perceive as inefficacious. A high level of customers’ OE also helps compensate for customers’ own perceptions of inefficacy. These two effects underscore the important role of employ- ees in influencing CP. Service firms could adopt two possi- ble means to enhance customers’ OE. First, they could intentionally convey positive, realistic efficacy-related mes- sages about employees to customers, such as by displaying certificates or performance awards or providing a third party’s (e.g., supervisors) positive comments or praises, to enhance customers’ perceptions of the efficacy of their employee partners (Jackson, Knapp, and Beauchamp 2008). Second, employees could demonstrate a strong motivation and readiness to coproduce with customers because people rely on these cues to form perceptions of their partners’ effi- cacy (Bonito 2002; Jackson, Knapp, and Beauchamp 2008; Snyder and Stukas 1999). However, the motivation and readiness shown by employees must be genuine; false pre- tenses could negatively affect customer satisfactions and loyalty (Hennig-Thurau et al. 2006). Do Customers and Employees Enjoy Service Participation? / 135 Redesign job to match customers’ and employees’ effi- cacy. Ideally, firms should match customers and employees with high SE and OE to produce maximum mutual partici- pation enjoyment. Firms should also facilitate continuous collaborations between these matched customer–employee dyads and avoid job rotations that contribute to their breakup. Assigning only employees with high levels of SE to serve actively participating customers, regardless of their level of efficacy belief, could be another effective strategy and promote mutual participation enjoyment for both par- ties. For example, banks could assign tasks that require more active CP, such as asset/fund management, to more efficacious employees and assign counter services to less efficacious employees. Limitations and Further Research Several limitations should be considered when interpreting the results and designing further research. First, we exam- ine the cocreation of participation enjoyment and the mod- erating role of relational efficacy beliefs in a particular type of close relationship (i.e., client–financial adviser dyads); further research should explore similarities and differences in results across service contexts. Systematic differences would offer an opportunity to identify boundary conditions of our proposed framework and hypotheses. Second, although enjoyment is a relevant positive, affective experi- ence created through CP in financial services (Allen and McGoun 2000; Payne, Storbacka, and Frow 2008; Sharma and Patterson 1999), other experiential or hedonic values, such as excitement, are also likely to emerge and await exploration in service contexts. Third, SE and OE are first- order efficacy perceptions and arguably have more direct effects in close relationships. Further research should inves- tigate the roles of other second-order perceptions and ascer- tain their relationships to SE and OE to contribute to a fuller understanding of their nature within dyadic contexts. Fourth, further research could enrich the measurements of the ultimate behavioral outcomes for both customers and employees by adopting multi-item measures. Finally, this research adopts a cross-sectional survey approach to study the role of efficacy in CP. Longitudinal designs would be valuable for understanding the development of relational efficacy beliefs over the long lifespan of dyads to allow for inferences of causality with respect to SE and OE and the direction of the theorized relationships, such as the impact of enjoyment on customers’ future level of participation. Appendix Measurement Items and Validity Assessment CP (Customers) Cronbach’s  = .91; composite reliability (CR) = .91; aver- age variance extracted (AVE) = .66; highest shared variance with other constructs (HSV) = .48 1. I spent a lot of time sharing information about my needs and opinions with the staff during the service process. 2. I put a lot of effort into expressing my personal needs to the staff during the service process. 3. I always provide suggestions to the staff for improving the service outcome. 4. I have a high level of participation in the service process. 5. I am very much involved in deciding how the services should be provided. Customer SE (Customers) Cronbach’s  = .92; CR = .94; AVE = .79; HSV = .42 1. I have confidence in my ability to participate effectively. 2. I do not doubt my ability to participate effectively. 3. I have excellent participation skills and ability. 4. I am proud of my participation skills and ability. Employee SE (Employees) Cronbach’s  = .90; CR = .92; AVE = .75; HSV = .51 1. I have confidence in my ability to respond to customers’ participation effectively. 2. I do not doubt my ability to respond to customers’ partici- pation effectively. 3. I have excellent skills and ability in responding to cus- tomers’ participation. 4. I am proud of my skills and ability in responding to cus- tomers’ participation. Customer OE (Customers) Cronbach’s  = .90; CR = .91; AVE = .72; HSV = .44 1. I have confidence in his/her ability to respond to my partici- pation effectively. 2. I do not doubt his/her ability to respond to my participation effectively. 3. He/She has excellent skills and ability in responding to my participation. 4. I am proud of his/her skills and ability in responding to my participation. Employee OE (Employees) Cronbach’s  = .88; CR = .91 AVE = .71; HSV = .38 1. I have confidence in his/her ability to participate effectively. 2. I do not doubt his/her ability to participate effectively. 3. He/She has excellent participation skills and ability. 4. I am proud of his/her participation skills and ability. Customer Participation Enjoyment (Customers) Cronbach’s  = .90; CR = .89; AVE = .67; HSV = .48 1. I enjoy the service process with my participation very much. 2. The service process with my participation is very enjoyable. 3. The service process with my participation can be described as fun. 4. I take great pleasure in the service process with my partici- pation. Employee Participation Enjoyment (Employees) Cronbach’s  = .90; CR = .89; AVE = .67; HSV = .50 1. I enjoy the service process with this customer’s participa- tion very much. 136 / Journal of Marketing, November 2012 2. The service process with this customer’s participation is very enjoyable. 3. The service process with this customer’s participation can be described as fun. 4. I take great pleasure in the service process with this cus- tomer’s participation. Customer Economic Value (Customers) Cronbach’s  = .90; CR = .89; AVE = .67; HSV = .51 •My participation helps me (1) receive higher quality services; (2) receive more customized services; (3) receive more con- trol over the service quality. Customer Relational Value (Customers) Cronbach’s  = .89; CR = .92; AVE = .70; HSV = .51 •My participation helps me (1) build a better relationship with the service provider; (2) receive relational approval from the service provider; (3) connect better with the service provider. Employee Job Stress (Employees) Cronbach’s  = .91; CR = .89; AVE = .71; HSV = .50 •This customer’s participation (1) makes me nervous; (2) cre- ates more problems for me; (3) makes me work under con- flicting directives. Employee Relational Value (Employees) Cronbach’s  = .94; CR = .90; AVE = .74; HSV = .45 •This customer’s participation helps me (1) build a better rela- tionship with the customer; (2) do a better job to serve his or her needs; (3) connect better with the customer. Customer Satisfaction (Customers) Cronbach’s  = .91; CR = .88; AVE = .65; HSV = .42 1. I am satisfied with the services provided. 2. This bank is a good bank to do business with. 3. The service of this bank meets my expectations. 4. Overall, I am satisfied with this bank’s service. Employee Job Satisfaction (employees) Cronbach’s  = .88; CR = .90; AVE = .70; HSV = .46 1. I am satisfied with working at this bank. 2. This bank is a good employer to work for. 3. I like working in this bank. 4. Overall, I am satisfied with my job. Customer Repurchase Intention (Customers) •How likely would you engage in a variety of other services provided by this bank in the future? (1 = “very unlikely,” and 5 = “highly likely”) Employee Job Performance (Supervisors) •How would you rate the overall performance of this employee? (1 = “need to improve,” and 5 = “excellent”) Do Customers and Employees Enjoy Service Participation? / 137 Relationship Counseling,” in Handbook of Counseling Psy- chology, S.D. Brown and R.W. Lent, eds. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 435–76. Bitner, Mary J. (1990), “Evaluating Service Encounters: The Effects of Physical Surroundings and Employee Responses,” Journal of Marketing, 54 (April), 69–82. ———, W. Faranda, A. Hubbert, and Valarie Zeithaml (1997), “Customer Contributions and Roles in Service Delivery,” International Journal of Service Industry Management, 8 (3), 193–205. Blau, Peter M. (1964), Exchange and Power in Social Life. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Bolton, Ruth N. and Shruti Saxena-Iyer (2009), “Interactive Ser- vices: A Framework, Synthesis and Research Direction,” Jour- nal of Interactive Marketing, 23 (1), 91–104. Bonito, Joseph A. (2002), “The Analysis of Participation in Small Groups: Methodological and Conceptual Issues Related to Interdependence,” Small Group Research, 33 (4), 412–38. Bray, Steven R., Nancy C. Gyurcsik, S. Nicole Culos-Reed, Kim- berley Dawson, and Kathleen Martin (2001), “An Exploratory Investigation of the Relationship Between Proxy Efficacy, Self-Efficacy and Exercise Attendance,” Journal of Health Psychology, 6 (4), 425–34. Brislin, Richard W. (1980), “Translation and Content Analysis of Oral and Written Materials,” in Handbook of Cross-Cultural Psychology, Vol. 2: Methodology, H.C. Triandis and J.W. Berry, eds. Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 389–444. Broderick, Anne J. (1999), “Role Theory and the Management of Service Encounters,” Service Industries Journal, 19 (2), 117–31. Brown, Tom J., John C. Mowen, Todd Donavan, and Jane W. Licata (2002), “The Customer Orientation of Service Workers: Personality Trait Effects on Self- and Supervisor Performance Ratings,” Journal of Marketing Research, 39 (February), 110–19. Buenz, Ruby Y. and Irving R. Merrill (1968), “Effects of Effort on Retention and Enjoyment,” Journal of Educational Psychol- ogy, 59 (3), 154–58. Calder, Bobby J. and Berry M. Staw (1975), “Self-Perception of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31 (4), 599–605. Carroll, Bob and Julia Loumidis (2001), “Children’s Perceived Competence and Enjoyment in Physical Education and Physi- cal Activity Outside School,” European Physical Education Review, 7 (1), 24–43. Castano, Raquel, Mita Sujan, Manish Kacker, and Harish Sujan (2008), “Managing Customer Uncertainty in the Adoption of New Products: Temporal Distance and Mental Stimulation,” Journal of Marketing Research, 45 (June), 320–36. Cermak, Dianne S.P., Karen Maru File, and Russ Alan Prince (1994), “Customer Participation in Service Specification and Delivery,” Journal of Applied Business Research, 10 (2), 90–98. Chan, Kimmy W. and Stella Y. Li (2010), “Understanding Customer- to-Customer Interactions in Virtual Communities: The Salience of Reciprocity,” Journal of Business Research, 63 (9/10), 1033–40. ———, Chi Kin (Bennett) Yim, and Simon S. Lam (2010), “Is Customer Participation in Value Creation a Double-Edged Sword? Evidence from Professional Financial Services Across Cultures,” Journal of Marketing, 74 (May), 48–64. Chandon, Pierre, Vicki G. Morwitz, and Werner J. Reinartz (2005), “Do Intentions Really Predict Behavior? Self-Generated Validity Effects in Survey Research,” Journal of Marketing, 69 (April), 1–14. REFERENCES Addis, Michela and Morris Holbrook (2001), “On the Conceptual Link Between Mass Customization and Experiential Consump- tion: An Explosion of Subjectivity,” Journal of Consumer Behavior, 1 (1), 50–66. Aiken, Leona S. and Stephen G. West (1991), Multiple Regres- sion: Testing and Interpreting Interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. Allen, Douglas E. and Elton G. McGoun (2000), “Hedonic Invest- ment,” Financial Services Review, 9 (4), 389–403. Anderson, James C. and David W. Gerbing (1988), “Structural Equation Modeling in Practice: A Review and Recommended Two-Step Approach,” Psychological Bulletin, 103 (3), 411–23. Arnould, Eric J. and Craig Thompson (2005), “Consumer Culture Theory (CCT): Twenty Years of Research,” Journal of Con- sumer Research, 31 (4), 868–82. Auh, Seigyoung, Simon J. Bell, Colin S. McLeod, and Eric Shih (2007), “Co-Production and Customer Loyalty in Financial Services,” Journal of Retailing, 83 (3), 359–70. Babin, Barry, William Darden, and Mitch Griffin (1994), “Work and/or Fun: Measuring Hedonic and Utilitarian Shopping Value,” Journal of Consumer Research, 20 (March), 644–56. Bandura, Albert (1977), “Self-Efficacy: Towards a Unifying Theory of Behavioral Change,” Psychological Review, 84 (2), 191–215. ——— (1982), “Self-Efficacy Mechanism in Human Agency,” American Psychologist, 37 (2), 122–47. ——— (1992), “Social Cognitive Theory of Social Referencing,” in Social Referencing and the Social Construction of Reality in Infancy, S. Feinman, ed. New York: Plenum, 175–208. ——— (1997), Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New York: Freeman. ——— (2001), “Social Cognitive Theory: An Agentic Perspec- tive,” Annual Review of Psychology, 52 (February), 1–26. Bargh, John A. and Roman D. Thein (1985), “Individual Construct Accessibility, Person Memory, and the Recall–Judgment Link: The Case of Information Overload,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49 (5), 1129–46. Baron, Reuben M. and David A. Kenny (1986), “Moderator- Mediator Variables Distinction in Social Psychological Research: Conceptual, Strategic, and Statistical Considera- tions,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51 (6), 1173–82. Bartholow, Bruce, Monica Fabiana, Gabriele Gratton, and Ann Bettencourt (2001), “A Psychophysiological Examination of Cognitive Processing of and Affective Responses to Social Expectancy Violations,” Psychological Science, 12 (3), 197–204. Bateson, J. (1985), “Perceived Control and the Service Encounter,” in The Service Encounter: Managing Employee/ Customer Interaction in Service Businesses, John A. Czepiel, Carol A. Surprenant, and Michael R. Solomon, eds. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 68–72. Beck, Aaron T. (1967), Depression: Clinical, Experimental, and Theoretical Aspects. New York: Harper and Row. Bedeian, Arthur, Gerald Farris, and K. Michele Kacmar (1992), “Age, Tenure, and Job Satisfaction: A Tale of Two Perspec- tives,” Journal of Vocational Behavior, 40 (1), 33–48. Belk, Russell W., Güliz Ger, and Søren Askegaard (2000), “The Missing Streetcar Named Desire,” in The Why of Consump- tion: Contemporary Perspectives on Consumer Motives, Goals, and Desires, S. Ratneshwar, David Mick, and Cynthia Huffman, eds. New York: Routledge, 98–119. Bendapudi, Neeli and Robert P. Leone (2003), “Psychological Implications of Customer Participation in Coproduction,” Journal of Marketing, 67 (January), 14–28. Berscheid, Ellen, Steven W. Gangestad, and Donna Kulakowski (1984), “Emotion in Close Relationships: Implications for Chiu, Hung-Chang, Yi-Ching Hsieh, Yu-Chuan Li, and Monle Lee (2005), “Relationship Marketing and Consumer Switching Behavior,” Journal of Business Research, 58 (12), 1681–89. Christensen, Alan J., John S. Wiebe, Eric G. Benotsch, and William J. Lawton (1996), “Perceived Health Competence, Health Locus of Control, and Patient Adherence in Renal Dial- ysis,” Cognitive Therapy and Research, 20 (4), 411–21. Clore, Gerald L., Norbert Schwarz, and Michael Conway (1994), “Affective Causes and Consequences of Social Information Processing,” in Handbook of Social Cognition: Basic Pro- cesses, R.S. Wyer and T.K. Srull, eds. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 324–404. Cronin, J. Joseph, Jr., and Steven A. Taylor (1992), “Measuring Service Quality: A Reexamination and Extension,” Journal of Marketing, 56 (July), 55–68. Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly (1975), Beyond Boredom and Anxiety. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. ——— (1990), Flow. New York: Harper and Row. ——— and J. LeFevre (1989), “Optimal Experience in Work and Leisure,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56 (5), 815–22. Dabholkar, Pratibha A. (1990), “How to Improve Perceived Ser- vice Quality by Increasing Customer Participation,” in Devel- opments in Marketing Science, Vol. 13, B.J. Dunlap, ed. Cul- lowhee, NC: Academy of Marketing Science, 483–87. ——— and Richard P. Bagozzi (2002), “An Attitudinal Model of Technology-Based Self-Service: Moderating Effects of Con- sumer Traits and Situational Factors,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 30 (3), 184–201. Deci, Edward L. (1975), Intrinsic Motivation. New York: Plenum Publishing. ——— and R. Ryan (1985), Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determi- nation in Human Behavior. New York: Plenum. Deighton, John and Kent Grayson (1995), “Marketing and Seduc- tion: Building Exchange Relationships by Managing Social Consensus,” Journal of Consumer Research, 21 (4), 660–76. Dierdorff, Erich C., Eric Surface, and Kenneth G. Brown (2010), “Frame-of-Reference Training Effectiveness: Effects of Goal Orientation and Self-Efficacy on Affective, Cognitive, Skill- Based, and Transfer Outcomes,” Journal of Applied Psychol- ogy, 95 (6), 1181–91. Donavan, D. Todd, Tom J. Brown, and John C. Mowen (2004), “Internal Benefits of Service-Worker Customer Orientation: Job Satisfaction, Commitment, and Organizational Citizenship Behaviors,” Journal of Marketing, 68 (January), 28–146. Ellen, Pam Scholder, William O. Bearden, and Subhash Sharma (1991), “Resistance to Technological Innovations: An Exami- nation of the Role of Self-Efficacy and Performance Satisfac- tion,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 19 (4), 297–307. Ennew, Christine and Martin Binks (1999), “The Impact of Partic- ipative Service Relationships on Quality, Satisfaction and Retention: An Exploratory Study,” Journal of Business Research, 46 (2), 121–32. Etgar, Michael (2008), “A Descriptive Model of the Consumer Co-Production Process,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 36 (1), 97–108. Festinger, Leon (1954), “A Theory of Social Comparison Pro- cesses,” Human Relations, 7 (2), 117–40. ——— (1957), A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row Peterson. Fornell, Claes and David Larcker (1981), “Evaluating Structural Equation Models with Unobservable Variables and Measure- ment Error,” Journal of Marketing Research, 18 (February), 39–50. Gist, Marilyn E. (1987), “Self-Efficacy: Implications for Organi- zational Behavior and Human Resource Management,” Acad- emy of Management Review, 12 (3), 472–85. 138 / Journal of Marketing, November 2012 ——— and Terence R. Mitchell (1992), “Self-Efficacy: A Theoreti- cal Analysis of Its Determinants and Malleability,” Academy of Management Review, 17 (2), 183–211. Hartline, Michael D. and O.C. Ferrell (1996), “The Management of Customer-Contact Service Employees: An Empirical Inves- tigation,” Journal of Marketing, 60 (October), 52–70. Hennig-Thurau, Thorsten, Markus Groth, Michael Paul, and Dwayne Gremler (2006), “Are All Smiles Created Equal? How Emotional Contagion and Emotional Labor Affect Service Relationships,” Journal of Marketing, 70 (May), 58–73. Hirschman, Elizabeth C. and Morris B. Holbrook (1982), “Hedo- nic Consumption: Emerging Concepts, Methods and Proposi- tions,” Journal of Marketing, 46 (Summer), 92–101. Holbrook, Morris and Elizabeth Hirschman (1982), “The Experi- ential Aspects of Consumption: Consumer Fantasies, Feelings and Fun,” Journal of Consumer Research, 9 (2), 132–40. Jackson, Ben and Mark R. Beauchamp (2010a), “Efficacy Beliefs in Coach–Athlete Dyads: Prospective Relationships Using Actor–Partner Interdependence Models,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 59 (2), 220–42. ——— and ——— (2010b), “Self-Efficacy as a Metaperception Within Coach–Athlete and Athlete–Athlete Relationships,” Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 11 (3), 188–196. ———, ———, and Peter Knapp (2007), “Relational Efficacy Beliefs in Athlete Dyads: An Investigation Using Actor–Partner Interdependence Models,” Journal of Sport and Exercise Psy- chology, 29 (2), 170–89. ———, P. Knapp, and M. Beauchamp (2008), “Origins and Conse- quences of Tripartite Efficacy Beliefs Within Elite Athlete Dyads,” Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 30 (5), 512–40. Janssen, Onne and Nico W. Van Yperen (2004), “Employees’ Goal Orientations, the Quality of Leader–Member Exchange, and the Outcomes of Job Performance and Job Satisfaction,” Acad- emy of Management Journal, 47 (3), 368–84. Jex, Steve and Paul Bliese (1999), “Efficacy Beliefs as a Modera- tor of the Impact of Work-Related Stressors: A Multilevel Study,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 84 (3), 349–61. Jones, Gareth R. (1986), “Socialization Tactics, Self-Efficacy, and Newcomers’ Adjustments to Organizations,” Academy of Man- agement Journal, 29 (2), 262–79. Jöreskog, Karl G. and Dag Sörbom (1993), LISREL 8: Structural Equation Modeling with the SIMPLIS Command Language. Chicago: Scientific Software International. Kernahan, Cyndi, Bruce Bartholow, and B. Ann Bettencourt (2000), “Effects of Category-Based Expectancy Violation on Affect-Related Evaluations: Toward a Comprehensive Model,” Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 22 (2), 85–100. Kerr, Norbert and Steven Bruun (1983), “Dispensability of Mem- ber Effort and Group Motivation Losses: Free-Rider Effects,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44 (1), 78–94. Kimiecik, Jay C. and Amy T. Harris (1996), “What Is Enjoyment? A Conceptual/Definitional Analysis with Implications for Sport and Exercise Psychology,” Journal of Sports and Exercise Psy- chology, 18 (3), 247–63. Koufaris, Marios (2002), “Applying the Technology Acceptance Model and Flow Theory to Online Consumer Behavior,” Infor- mation Systems Research, 13 (2), 205–223. Lent, Robert W. and Frederick G. Lopez (2002), “Cognitive Ties That Bind: A Tripartite View of Efficacy Beliefs in Growth- Promoting Relationships,” Journal of Social and Clinical Psy- chology, 21 (3), 256–86. Locke, Edwin A. and Gary P. Latham (1990), “Work Motivation and Satisfaction: Light at the End of the Tunnel,” Psychologi- cal Science, 1 (4), 240–46. Maddux, James E. (1995), Self-Efficacy, Adaptation, and Adjust- ment: Theory, Research, and Application (The Plenum Series in Social/Clinical Psychology). New York: Plenum Press, 173–202. Martinko, Mark J. and William L. Gardner (1982), “Learned Help- lessness: An Alternative Explanation for Performance Deficits,” Academy of Management Review, 7 (2), 195–204. Mathwick, Charla and Edward Rigdon (2004), “Play, Flow, and the Online Search Experience,” Journal of Consumer Research, 31 (September), 324–32. May, Douglas R., Catherine E. Schwoerer, Kendra Reed, and Paul Potter (1997), “Employee Reactions to Ergonomic Job Design: The Moderating Effects of Health Locus of Control and Self- Efficacy,” Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 2 (1), 11–24. McCarthy, Paul, Marc Jones, and David Clark-Carter (2008), “Sources of Youth Sport Enjoyment: A Developmental Analy- sis,” Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 9 (2), 142–56. McClure, Jeff (2003), The Personal Wealth Coach: Creating and Rebuilding Invested Wealth in the 21st Century. Austin, TX: TurnKey Press. McKee, Karyl, Christina S. Simmers, and Jane Licata (2006), “Customer Self-Efficacy and Response to Service,” Journal of Service Research, 8 (3), 207–220. Mendes, Wendy B., Jim Blascovich, Sarah B. Hunter, Brian Lickel, and John T. Jost (2007), “Threatened by the Unex- pected: Physiological Responses During Social Interactions with Expectancy-Violating Partners,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92 (4), 698–716. Meuter, Matthew L., Mary J. Bitner, Amy L. Ostrom, and Stephen W. Brown (2005), “Choosing Among Alternative Service Delivery Models: An Investigation of Customer Trial of Self- Service Technologies,” Journal of Marketing, 69 (April), 61–83. Mills, Peter and James Morris (1986), “Clients as ‘Partial’ Employees of Service Organizations: Role Development in Client Participation,” Academy of Management Review, 11 (4), 726–35. Morgan, Neil A. and Lopo Leotte Rego (2006), “The Value of Dif- ferent Customer Satisfaction and Loyalty Metrics in Predicting Business Performance,” Marketing Science, 25 (5), 426–39. Nakamura, Jeanne and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (2002), “The Concept of Flow,” in Handbook of Positive Psychology, C.R. Snyder and Shane J. Lopez, eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 89–105. Novak, Thomas P., Donna L. Hoffman, and Yiu-Fai Yung (2000), “Measuring the Customer Experience in Online Environments: A Structural Modeling Approach,” Marketing Science, 19 (1), 22–42. Oliver, Richard L. (1980), “A Cognitive Model of the Antecedents and Consequences of Satisfaction Decisions,” Journal of Mar- keting Research, 17 (November), 460–69. ——— and John E. Swan (1989), “Consumer Perceptions of Inter- personal Equity and Satisfaction in Transactions: A Field Sur- vey Approach,” Journal of Marketing, 53 (April), 21–35. Parker, Sharon K. (1998), “Enhancing Role Breadth Self-Efficacy: The Roles of Job Enrichment and Other Organizational Inter- ventions,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 83 (6), 835–52. Payne, Adrian F., Kaj Storbacka, and Pennie Frow (2008), “Man- aging the Co-Creation of Value,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 36 (1), 83–96. Phillips, Diane M. and Hans Baumgartner (2002), “The Role of Consumption Emotions in the Satisfaction Response,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 12 (3), 243–52. Pinquart, Martin, Rainer K. Silbereisen, and Linda P. Juang (2004), “Buffering Effects of Adolescents’ Self-Efficacy Beliefs on Psychological Responses to Social Change,” Jour- nal of Adolescent Research, 19 (3), 340–59. Prahalad, C.K. and Venkatram Ramaswamy (2004), “Co-Creation Experiences: The Next Practice in Value Creation,” Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18 (3), 5–14. Riggs, Matt L., Jette Warka, Bernadette Babasa, Rence Betan- court, and Stephenie Hooker (1994), “Development and Vali- Do Customers and Employees Enjoy Service Participation? / 139 dation of Self-Efficacy and Outcome Expectancy Scales for Job-Related Applications,” Educational and Psychological Measurement, 54 (3), 793–802. Schaubroeck, John and Deryl E. Merritt (1997), “Divergent Effects of Job Control on Coping with Work Stressors: The Key Role of Self-Efficacy,” Academy of Management Journal, 40 (3), 738–54. Schneider, Benjamin (1980), “The Service Organization: Climate Is Crucial,” Organizational Dynamics, 9 (2), 52–65. ——— and David E. Bowen (1995), Winning the Service Game. Boston: Harvard Business School Press. Schwoerer, Catherine E. and Douglas R. May (1996), “Age and Work Outcomes: The Moderating Effect of Self-Efficacy and Tool Design Effectiveness,” Journal of Organizational Behav- ior, 17 (5), 469–87. Sharma, Neeru and Paul G. Patterson (1999), “The Impact of Communication Effectiveness and Service Quality on Rela- tionship Commitment in Consumer, Professional Services,” Journal of Services Marketing, 13 (2), 151–71. Shin, Namin (2006), “Online Learners’ ‘Flow’ Experience: An Empirical Study,” British Journal of Educational Technology, 37 (5), 705–720. Snyder, Mark and Arthur Stukas Jr. (1999), “Interpersonal Pro- cesses: The Interplay of Cognitive, Motivational, and Behav- ioral Activities in Social Interaction,” Annual Review of Psy- chology, 50, 273–30. Solomon, Michael R., Carol Surprenant, John A. Czepiel, and Evelyn G. Gutman (1985), “A Role Theory Perspective on Dyadic Interactions: The Service Encounter,” Journal of Mar- keting, 49 (Winter), 99–111. Stajkovic, Alexander D. and Fred Luthans (1998), “Self-Efficacy and Work-Related Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” Psycho- logical Bulletin, 124 (2), 240–61. Strangor, Charles and David McMillan (1992), “Memory for Expectancy-Congruent and Expectancy-Incongruent Informa- tion: A Review of the Social and Social Developmental Litera- tures,” Psychological Bulletin, 111 (1), 42–61. Strecher, Victor J., Brenda McEvoy De Vellis, Marshall H. Becker, and Irwin M. Rosenstock (1986), “The Role of Self-Efficacy in Achieving Health Behavior Change,” Health Education Quar- terly, 13 (1), 73–91. Thompson, Suzanne C., Alexandria Sobolew-Shubin, Michael E. Galbraith, Lenore Schwankovsky, and Dana Cruzen (1993), “Maintaining Perceptions of Control: Finding Perceived Con- trol in Low-Control Circumstances,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64 (2), 293–304. Trevino, Linda K. and Jane Webster (1992), “Flow in Computer- Mediated Communication: Electronic Mail and Voice Mail Evaluation and Impacts,” Communication Research, 19 (5), 539–73. Van Beuningen, Jacqueline, Ko de Ruyter, Martin Wetzels, and Sandra Streuken (2009), “Customer Self-Efficacy in Technology- Based Self-Service, Assessing Between- and Within-Person Differences,” Journal of Service Research, 11 (4), 407–428. Vargo, Stephen L. and Robert F. Lusch (2004), “Evolving to a New Dominant Logic for Marketing,” Journal of Marketing, 68 (January), 1–17. ——— and ——— (2006), “Service-Dominant Logic: Reactions, Reflections, and Refinements,” Marketing Theory, 6 (3), 281–88. Wagner, Tillmann, Thorsten Hennig-Thurau, and Thomas Rudolph (2009), “Does Customer Demotion Jeopardize Loyalty?” Jour- nal of Marketing, 73 (May), 69–85. Webb, Dave (2000), “Understanding Customer Role and Its Importance in the Formation of Service Quality Expectations,” Services Industries Journal, 20 (1), 1–21. Wood, Robert and Albert Bandura (1989), “Impact of Conceptions of Ability on Self-Regulatory Mechanisms and Complex Deci- sion Making,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56 (3), 407–415. Wyer, Natalie, Jeffrey W. Sherman, and Steven Stroessner (2000), “The Roles of Motivation and Ability in Controlling the Con- sequences of Stereotype Suppression,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26 (1), 13–25. 140 / Journal of Marketing, November 2012 Xie, Chunyan, Richard P. Bagozzi, and Sigurd V. Troye (2008), “Trying to Prosume: Toward a Theory of Consumers as Co- Creators of Value,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Sci- ence, 36 (1), 109–122.